---
title: Current projects
description: What I'm working on right now.
layout: page
---

*2020-11-21*

In this year of Covid, I've sharply limited my going out. Even though the fuel
station branding business is unusually busy this year, there's still time that
needs to be filled, and every now and then I try to fill some of it with
something productive, or at least interesting.

My latest project was putting this website together. I'm continuing to polish
it a bit, but I've basically got what I want up, except for an older
half-finished project producing answers to the coding exercises in _How to
Think Like a Computer Scientist: Learning with Python 3_. I had been working
away at that, learning Python 3 in the process, when the Coronavirus hit. Then
I started producing daily Covid updates ([here](/covid/index.html)). I stopped
immediately before Ohio locked down, at which point Governor DeWine started
giving daily Covid updates. I wouldn't try to compete with _that_.

I suppose it's time to finish what I started with the Python 3 textbook, so
I'll make that one of my current projects.

Another idea I've tossed around for some years is to start studying for and
taking the actuarial exams. This will be tricky, given that I have taken
practically no math, with the exception of a Stats class, since my junior year
of highschool, 13 years ago. But I have a natural aptitude for math (I was one
of just six highschoolers in Ohio to qualify for the USAMO back in 2006), and
I'm sure I can pick it up. My basic strategy is to review high school math,
review the college math I missed, and just start picking away via the Adapt
practice-test system. Studying for the actuarial exams in my spare time
certainly seems like a better investment of time than _not_ studying for the
actuarial exams in my spare time.

My plan at the moment, on evenings where I'm not working, is to alternate --
one evening for Python 3, and one evening for actuarial studies. And I'll keep
picking away at one and the other until and unless I find some other better way
to use my time.

---

_This page is released under the [CC0
1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) license._

