---
title: Odds and ends
description: A dumping-place for random thoughts
layout: post
---

_2020-10-24 to 2020-11-21_

I've elsewhere produced a [list](worthwhile-things.html) of things worth paying
attention to. But this page is not that page. This page is a place to collect
thoughts on all sorts of things, some of which might be spun off into their own
pages at some point.

# Table of contents
* TOC
{:toc}

# BASIC

My first programming language was BASIC. I wrote simple math programs, mostly.
At first, I wrote them on paper, not having any kind of computer they could
work on, and then I would mentally step through them. They were an interesting
sort of logic puzzle. I did eventually learn that my grandmother had a sort of
children's toy computer with a one-line console that one could enter BASIC
programs into and have them run, and later I got a graphing calculator that
used some variant of BASIC as well. Because I tended to get my information from
libraries, I didn't realize at the time that BASIC had fallen out of widespread
use a few years before I was born. When I found out, I promptly took a bus to
the local public library, checked out a book on C++, and tried programming on
paper with *that*, and boy, did that not go well! 

# Berners-Lee, Tim

It's widely known that Tim Berners-Lee produced the first modern website.
However, it's perhaps not as well known that it's still online, and you can go
see it [here](http://info.cern.ch/).

# Borlaug, Norman

_2020-12-12_

Today, the world has seen about half a century of declining population 
growth, moving closer to population stability, while adequate nutrition 
is available to an increasing fraction of the world's population. It was by 
no means clear, fifty years ago, that things would turn out so well. 
Between 1965 and 1970, world annual population passed 2%, which is an 
incredible rate -- it would result in a doubling of population every 35 
years. It was in this environment that Paul Ehrlich published his famous 1968 
_Population Bomb_ warning that world death rates would increase amidst the 
starvation of hundreds of millions during the 1970's and 1980's.

Norman Borlaug, among others, ensured that Ehrlich's predictions of doom 
did not come to pass. This is not to say Borlaug was unsympathetic to Ehrlich's concerns -- Borlaug continued for a long time to express concerns about global population. But his work on dwarf varieties of wheat helped Mexico, Pakistan, India, and the developing world more generally to avoid food shortages.

Since then, Mexican and Indian Total Fertility Rates have fallen to between 
2.1 and 2.2 -- about 2.1 being the rate needed for a stable population 
long-term. And while Pakistan's fertility has not yet stablized, 
[I read]([200~https://www.indexmundi.com/g/g.aspx?c=pk&v=31) that from 2000 to 
2020 it has dropped from 5.0 to 3.6, which is significant movement in that 
direction. The world more broadly has seen a decrease in TFR from 4.96 in 
the early 1950's to around 2.5 this decade. In other words, the bulk of the 
fertility changes needed to stabilize world population have already occurred.

# Bullard, Reuben

_2020-11-26_

When I was eleven, my grandfather, the late Ronald Henderson, professor of
English at Cincinnati Christian University for forty years, had me audit a
class in geology. This would have been about 2002. Reuben Bullard was the
University's geology professor, a potentially sensitive spot to occupy in a
social circle where the age of the earth was considered a theological issue. I
never was able to figure out whether he agreed with the scientific consensus on
the age of the earth. We learned about how rocks were formed, and their various
types, and such, but never once did the age of these rocks come into the
picture. He was a gifted man, and looking back I wonder what he really thought.

Prof. Bullard died in 2004, and I had the privilege of taking his last geology
class. What I did not fully understand as a child was that he had pioneered the
use of geological principles in studying archaeological sites. The prominent
archaeologist William Dever wrote in his forward to Bullard's Festschrift, _My
Father's World_:

>How did we ever do without a geologist? Or more precisely, a
>"Geo-archaeologist," for that was the sub-discipline that Reuben created
>almost single-handedly in Israel (and later in Jordan).

>Geo-archaeology is taken for granted today; but when Reuben appeared on the
>scene in the 1960s no one envisioned it or saw any need for it. Seldom does
>one individual contribute so much to changing the focus of a discipline, least
>of all one as traditional as biblical archaeology was back then.

Prof. Bullard was a modest man, and did not give any indication, in that
introductory geology course, that he'd had a part in inventing a new
subdiscipline. I will always be grateful that I had the chance to study under
him.

# China's economy

_2020-11-22_

Singapore's rapid transition from very poor to very wealthy has not been
equalled by any country I know of. But Singapore is a small country, with about
six million inhabitants. For a country that has rapidly pulled a very large
number of people out of deep poverty, the greatest example in the modern world
is China. This nation of 1.4 billion people has a GDP per capita, in current US
dollars, of \$11,429 as of 2019. This is up from \$452 in 1960, which comes to
an average annual increase of 5.6%. However, the last ten years after seen a
per capita growth rate of just 2.7% on average. (Values calculated from World
Bank
[numbers](https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD?view=chart).)

As China's transformation slows, perhaps the next major story to be told in the
elimination of poverty is that of India. India still trails behind China, at
about \$2,104 of per-capita income as of 2019, up from $82 in 1960. It started
behind China and remains behind China -- its growth rate on average the last
sixty years has been about the same. But over the last ten years, its growth
rate has been more than double China's. If this continues, we will see India
catching up, year by year, closer to where China is. This would draw hundreds
more millions of people out of poverty and readjust the global balance of
power.

# China's one-child policy

_2020-11-26_

Mao Zedong encouraged Chinese people to have as many children as possible, with
the goal of increasing China's military capacity. Of course, high fertility is
not sustainable in the long term in the modern world -- resource limits will
come up at some point. In the 1970's, the Chinese government began putting
downward pressure on births, and in 1979 rolled out the one-child policy. This
lasted, with various modifications, loopholes, and exceptions, until 2015, when
it was replaced with a two-child policy. The Chinese government is now hoping
for birth rates to go _up_. 

This may not work. China, by adopting a two-child policy, is still putting more
pressure downward on births than Thailand, Japan, Singapore, and South Korea, 
which
all have _lower_ rates than China despite allowing people to have as many
children as they want. All over the modern world, birth rates have either
dropped to below-replacement levels or seem to be headed in that direction. It
is unclear if or when this trend will stabilize. China may find that it regrets
having artificially pushed rates downward ahead of the natural trend-line. The
Chinese workforce has already been shrinking since about 2013. Because any new
births will not enter the workforce for about two decades, that means at least
two decades of shrinking workforce are already baked in. To turn things
around would require a large increase in the number of children over the next
two decades, at the same time that adult only children are facing the
responsibility of caring alone for two parents and four grandparents. It may
turn out to be impossible to get fertility rates up under those conditions.
Time will tell.

# Cincinnati Christian University

While I am not personally religious, my family tree goes back into the
group known widely as the Christian Churches / Churches of Christ. My parents
met each other, and both sets of my grandparents met each other, at the
university whose final name was Cincinnati Christian University, and which had
previously gone under the names of Cincinnati Bible Seminary and Cincinnati
Bible College.

The college was founded in 1924, by the conservative side of a recent
denominational split with the group that is now known as the Disciples of
Christ. Protestant sects were 
[splitting right and
left](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fundamentalist%E2%80%93Modernist_controversy)
in those days, and it was
on the right that the founders of CCU fell. It grew to occupy an important social
position in the Christian Churches as an intellectual center and
training-ground for ministers. Opinions vary, but the mid-sixties must have
been near its peak influence. You can see an old recruitment video, in which
both my grandparents on one side of my family appear,
[here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lsKRQnpemYc).

My grandfather, Ronald Henderson, was a professor there from 1961-2001, and
through his influence and other family connections the social world of CCU
continues to form a background to my family's world. The college eventually
shut down in 2019 after facing a long and complex battle with the financial
realities of running a traditional religious university in what is increasingly
not a traditional religious world.

# Cladistics

[Cladistics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cladistics) classifies living beings
in terms of biological relatedness rather than the categories we intuitively
use in English. See, for example, the title of Lulu Miller's _Why Fish Don't
Exist_.

# Darwin, Charles

Everybody knows about Charles Darwin, and I'm not here to defend his theories. 
The case for evolution is made ably by Jerry Coyne in _Why Evolution is True_, 
and I'd direct anyone curious to read it. There'll be no relitigating a dead 
controversy here. 

What is sometimes not appreciated is that Darwin's theory of natural selection 
is an outgrowth of Thomas Malthus's theories on the principles of population 
growth. Thomas Malthus observed that because populations, both human and 
animal, tend to grow exponentially when unchecked, they will grow until they 
bump up against resource limits strict enough to make survival difficult. Once 
limits are in play and survival is difficult, some survive and produce 
offspring, while others do not. Here it is that Darwin had his crucial insight. 
If the survivors vary from those who perish in certain traits, and if those 
traits are heritable, then over time the frequency of these more "fit" traits 
-- traits suitable to the task of surviving -- will increase throughout a 
given population. 

This provided a mechanism for a population to become better adapted to an 
environmental niche over time. The mathematics of inheritance would not be 
worked out by the broader scientific community (despite the forgotten work 
of Mendel) until the early twentieth century, and the DNA molecule itself 
wouldn't give up its basic structure in the 1950's. The project of recording 
the human genetic sequence wouldn't be complete until 2003. But back in 1859, 
when _The Origin of Species_ was published, the basic implication of Malthus's 
work was clear. And it was the much-maligned Malthus who got the ball rolling 
in 1798 with his _Essay_.

# Dennett, Daniel

Daniel Dennett is one of the more interesting philosophers alive today. You
might enjoy his _Intuition Pumps and Other Tools for Thinking_.

# DOS

*2020-11-22*

I weep for the generation growing up now, as they might go their whole lives
without interacting with DOS. Mind you, I'm no child of the DOS era myself -- I
was born in 1991, and Microsoft had already released Windows back in 1985. But
I did come into this world late enough that DOS was still hanging around -- on
an old but still working computer in my grandfather's basement, running the
electronic card catalogue at the Cincinnati Public Library, tracking orders at
MacDonalds. It was around _just_ enough to make it obvious that GUI's weren't
synonymous with operating systems; they were an innovation. They were a choice.
And the basic, underlying systems that ran computers were made of something
much like text -- the little buttons and menus were just a pretty shell over
something more abstract.

I don't really know that today's youth will miss anything necessary by not
seeing DOS in day-to-day life. It's possible I'm just being a cranky old geezer
and that previous generations would have said similar things about smoke
signals, or loud beeping noises, or punch cards, or whatever it was early
computers ran on.

# English as a global language

_2020-11-22_

Greek continued to be a language in widespread use in the Eastern Roman Empire
well after Greek political power had been superseded by Rome. Latin continued
to be the language of scholarship and international relations in Western Europe
long after the fall of the Roman Empire. Indeed, Portuguese, Spanish, Italian,
and French are all derived from Latin rather than from whatever pre-Latin
languages were indigenously spoken in those regions. Some people think that the
United States is on its way out as the leading superpower, but even if this is
so, it does not mean that English will rapidly give way to some other language.

Some people think Mandarin Chinese is the future global language. But there is
still little evidence of large numbers of people outside China adopting it.
Meanwhile, in China itself hundreds of millions of people have had some kind of
sustained exposure to English, even if fluency is less common. Meanwhile, in
India, the legal system conducts its business in English, and the use of
English is rapidly spreading throughout the country. Pew Research
([source](https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/10/08/more-than-any-other-foreign-language-european-youths-learn-english/))
finds that the great bulk of European children are taught English in school
(77%). 

The internet and globalization more broadly are leading to an incredible
consolidation of languages. 
In a winner-takes all dynamic, a global world pushes people to learn more
widely-spoken languages and leave behind less-used languages. A relative of
mine is a missionary working to translate the Bible into a language in Papua
New Guinea. A few decades ago, when she began, there were about seven hundred
speakers. Today, most of the young people in the three villages where the
language exists do not speak their parents' language very fluently, but speak a
local language based on English. By the time she finishes her project, if she ever
does, it is possible that her Bible will be the last, and first, piece of
literature ever written in a language to die out over the next few decades.

This story is repeating itself all over the world. Filipino teenagers
frequently speak to one another in English, and President Duterte frequently
gives speeches in which he veers back and forth between Tagalog and English
apparently at random. Somewhere close to two billion people worldwide speak
English, about a quarter of the world population. Meanwhile, the Chinese
government [estimates](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-23975037) that
30% of _Chinese_ people still do not speak Mandarin as of 2014.

The future is hard to predict, but English has at this point acquired
widespread enough use that I think it will continue to increase in use
worldwide for the rest of my life. Even if the United States loses its status
as a global leader -- even if every American somehow disappeared -- I think
English has acquired enough status as a cornerstone of international relations,
business, and the internet that it's too late to stop it from becoming a
language spoken, to one degree or another, by almost everyone worldwide. It's a
winner-take-all situation where widespread use begets more widespread use, and
it looks to me like English has already won the battle for global dominance in
principle. The quadrupling of English use still ahead is just two more
doublings to go after the approximately eight doublings in English usage that
have occurred in the past five centuries.

There are some who say that widespread Spanish-speaking immigration is somehow
going to remove English from its status as the language of the United States.
This is nonsense. I came to the United States at five with a five-year-old's
fluent command of Spanish, and now I don't talk Spanish too well. This is what
happens when small children come to the US speaking Spanish. True, some adults
never do quite get the hang of English, just as previous generations of
Germans, Poles, and Italians didn't all become English-speakers. But their
children did, and do. There is no realistic scenario in which huge numbers of
Spanish-speaking immigrants and their children for multiple generations do not
manage to learn English. Any increase in Hispanic immigration, from a language
standpoint, is an increase in the number of English-speakers in the United
States: if not immediately, then over the following decades. 

# Exponential growth: <br>back-of-envelope calculations

The world is made of numbers, among other things, and to understand it you've
got to understand numbers, among other things. And in the study of living
beings, whether you're talking about biology or economics, having a mental
grasp on exponential growth is useful. And to start to intuitively grasp
exponents, you're going to need to be able to do rough on-the-fly calculations
in your head. And to do that, I think the easiest starting point is to get a
little bit familiar with powers of two, powers of ten, and the law of 72.

The powers of ten are well-known, and our numerical system is based on them: 1,
10, 100, 1000, 10,000, ...

The powers of two are a bit harder, but you'd do well to memorize at least the
first ten and perhaps the first twenty: 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512,
1024, and maybe also 2048, 4096, 8192, 16,384, 32,768, 65,536, 131,072,
262,144, 524,288, and 1,048,576. The really critical thing to notice, for
mental-math purposes, is that 1000 is about 1024 and 1,000,000 is about
1,048,576. Or, to round things off a bit: 2^10 = 10^3, 2^20 = 10^6, and so on.

This allows you to move back and forth between doublings and powers of ten
with a little practice. Thus, 2^23 must equal 2^3 times 2^10 times 2^10, and by
substituting 10^3 for 2^10, we can say that 2^23 = 2^3 times 10^6, or eight
million. If you're following along with a calculator, you'll notice the errors,
but don't worry about them for now.

Likewise, you can do the same thing backwards. For something to multiply by 7
billion, for example, how many times must it double? 7 billion is 7 times 10^9,
and thus 7 times 2^30. And since 7 is between 2^2 and 2^3, multiplying
something by 7 billion requires between 22 and 23 doublings. So a process by
which something doubles once a century will take 2200 years and change to
multiply 7-billion-fold.

The next tool is the rule of 72, which is the key to converting to and from
percentage changes and doubling. The rule is that, if something grows at x
percent per unit of time, then it will take 72 over x units to double. So something
that grows 2% per year, like the hourly productivity of workers in
technologically leading modern societies, will double every 36 years. That's
about three doublings per century, so in the 200 years of modern economic
growth, the richest countries will have seen six doublings of productivity, or
64-fold growth over 200 years.

So you can start working out, in your head, the way that relatively small
incremental changes add up to the fundamental transformation of the world.
Here's another. Suppose one person has a communicable disease, and the number
of people with it grows an average of 10% per week. By the law of 72, that's
about a doubling every 10 weeks, five doublings a year, and thus ten doublings
every two years. Ten doublings is multiplication by one thousand, so it would
take a little over six years for the entire world to catch the disease in
question.

More relevantly, consider the coronavirus. If one person had it in November
2019, and it doubled its number of hosts every week, to reach all the world,
given unconstrained growth, would have taken 22 to 23 weeks. Of course, there
are in the real world complications, like mitigation strategies, contact
tracing, weather, masks, and vaccines. But a little simple mental math can help
give you an intuition for where things are going if something doesn't stop
them.

# Far Side, The

Gary Larson's _The Far Side_ is one of the various curiosities that my
grandfather Henderson introduced me to when I was young. He had a book of Gary
Larson's comics as part of the his massive personal library. Like many good
things, _The Far Side_ has found its way to the internet, where it can be seen
[here](https://www.thefarside.com/).

# FSI Language Courses

There is a provision in law -- I'm not intimately familiar with the details --
that has the effect of causing works produced by the US government to fall into
the public domain. The US government, after all, is funded by tax-payers, and
copyright is generally intended to protect the financial interests of authors,
so there is an argument that the public has already bought the rights to things
produced by the federal government.

The result of this is that certain language self-study courses, originally used
for government officials, are allowed to circulate freely on the internet. An
example is the [Hebrew
course](https://fsi-languages.yojik.eu/languages/FSI/fsi-hebrew.html), which I
found very useful back in my Hebrew-studying days. They are not trendy, or
beautiful, or complete -- they consist of a text which introduces simple
conversations in the language, and a set of tapes, along with instructions on
how to study. But if the Hebrew text is any indication, they really do help
with grasping the very basics of a language when you're starting.

# Gesenius, Wilhelm

Wilhelm Gesenius was -- I am probably quoting someone who I can't remember any
more verbatim -- the father of biblical Hebrew lexicography. He produced a
celebrated grammar of biblical Hebrew in 1813, which continued to go through
various editions during his life. Strikingly for such an early academic work in
a well-studied field, his _Grammar_ continues to be used in contemporary
academic settings despite the publication of a number of other worthy grammars
since.

# GitHub tutorial

(2020-11-5) I recently started keeping track of my website on GitHub
([here](https://github.com/mitchellbpowell/website)), and getting up and
running was made easier by a nifty
[tutorial](https://product.hubspot.com/blog/git-and-github-tutorial-for-beginners)
produced by Meghan Nelson.

# Gregg shorthand

In 1888, Robert Gregg invented a nifty way to write things down really, really
fast. Even if you don't want to learn the whole system, you could learn the way
to write some common words in it. If you find yourself needing to take notes
while people talk frequently, it's very helpful. See [Wikipedia's
article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gregg_shorthand) on it, and a sample
[here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gregg_shorthand#/media/File:Gregg_shorthand_A_Christmas_Carol.jpg).

# Harris, Judith Rich

Judith Rich Harris wrote the groundbreaking _The Nurture Assumption_, in which
she argued, with a great deal of evidence, that heredity is much more important
than commonly imagined, and childrearing much less, in explaining personality
variations in human beings. Her conclusions were by no means unanimously
received without protest, and people continue to argue about these things, but
the publication of her book did mark a milestone in the everlasting
nature-nurture debate which has raged ever since Galton coined the term.

# Henderson, Ronald

_2020-11-26_

My grandfather, Ronald Henderson, passed away in October 2019 after over a
decade of
struggling with Alzheimer's and Parkinsons. He had always been a quiet, modest
man, and in the last few years of his life he was even quieter. He was a man
who figured out what he wanted to do early, and then simply did it. Immediatley
upon completing his master's degree, he became a professor of English at
what would later be called Cincinnati Christian University in 1961. He
continued in that position for forty years, retiring at 65 in 2001. He then
spent ten years volunteering to run correspondence courses for the Christian
Restoration Association, a related institution, until stepping down from that
position as well, just as his dementia was beginning to kick in.

We spent a lot of time together in the last couple of years of his life, and at
some point he lost track of who I was, although he recognized that he knew me
somehow at was always glad to see me. He had always been someone who was very
careful about picking his battles, someone who didn't welcome any unnecessary
conflict, and his mild temperament served his well as a dementia patient.
Often, when insisting that we help him stand well after he was bedridden and
unable to do so, he would drop the issue and move on to another topic not
because we convinced him we needed to stay in bed, but just because he wasn't
the type to argue. Sometimes he would simply raise his eyebrows skeptically and
move on.

He was an early adopter of computers, which he used to continue a journaling
practice he had carrried on for decades on paper. His journals were simple.
Sometimes he would go for stretched where he would simply write down any small
expenses he had come upon ("40 cents, candy"; "60 cents, lunch"), while
sometimes he would write down where he went or who he had visited with.
Sometimes he would only write a brief paragraph every week or so. But, bit by
bit, unspectacular but steady effort adds up.

A few years before he died, he collected up mentions he had made of me as a
child up to when I was about nine years old, and handed me about sixty pages of
material. It was an extraordinary gift for a young adult to receive, and it's
the reason I keep a fitful journal myself. Hopefully someone will find it as
interested when I'm eighty as I did when he was.

He carefully worked to encourage my interest in science, literature, and math
from a young age. He is probably where I got my enjoyment of finding typos in 
published books. He complained to me once that once computers began to be used
in editing books, he didn't have nearly as many typos to find anymore in books.

One of his greatest superpowers was that he did not feel the need to loudly express
his opinions. I was not given any hint, for example, of how he felt about any 
particular political party or politician outside of one stray comment he once made
when his dementia was quite advanced, and even then it was a perfectly reasonable 
comment about a particularly awful individual.

Although a quiet man, he was married to a very outgoing wife, and together they
entertained upward of two thousand guests at their home in Cincinnati, which I 
know because they kept a list of everyone who ever visited. They fed the hungry,
visited the sick, rented out rooms to innumerable people, and frequently had dozens
of students over simultaneously to play cards. As a young child, I thought that 
this is what a professor was: a parental sort of figure who stood at the center
of both the intellectual and personal lives of massive numbers of students.
It was only later in life that I realized what extraordinary outliers they had
been.

His funeral, needless to say, was extremely well-attended. His obituary, which still
exists online, gives only the slightest hint of the life he and my grandmother
built together. The institutional to which he dedicated his entire career closed 
down suddenly, after his death but before his funeral, which seemed somehow fitting.
It may be childish, but some part of my mind would have found it incongrous for 
Cincinnati Christian University to go on existing in a world without my
grandfather. His influence, though, lives on in the minds of hundreds of people
who saw a hardworking and very intelligent, but modest man going about his work
faithfully and without fanfare.

Even when he no longer knew where he was or who was visiting him, he welcomed
his many visitors with a friendly and dignified demeanor that was amazing to
watch. As painful as it was to watch a sharp mind like his unravelling until
he could no longer speak, it was at the same time inspiring to learn that a 
human mind could unravel so gracefully. He hung on longer than expected. Put 
into hospice care with less than six months to live, he continued for about a
year.

One guest, probably unused to dealing with an advanced dementia, visited 
shortly after his transfer to hospice, and said something like, "I heard that
you were recently transferred to hospice."

A brief expression of surprise flitted across my grandfathers face -- he no 
longer could remember events for more than a few hours for the most part -- 
and he said, "Oh, I hadn't realized." His guest looked striken with awkwardness
for a moment, and then my grandfather asked him how he was doing and the
conversation went on as if he hadn't just learned he was dying.

My grandfather had watched the nightly news, Wheel of Fortune, and Jeopardy
ever day through most of his adult life, but in his last few months he 
lost interest. The only thing on television he seemed to like was Animal
Planet. Once, after he had nearly entirely ceased speaking, he saw something
that sparked his interest, turned to me, and said, "Curiosity. Fascinating."
Those were the last words he said to me unprompted beyond simple one-word 
answers to questions and "Hello."

One fairly uneventful evening, I fed him dinner, which he finished, unusually
for him -- he usually just ate a little bit of his food toward the end. I 
did not realize that it would be his last; he simply stopped accepting food
and liquid and passed away, surrounded by family, 
about a week later. He died, his university
died, coronavirus struck the world, and now Alex Trebeck, whose _Jeopardy_ he
had watched so faithfully, is gone as well. It seems, in a way, like an entire
era passed away with him.

# Hofstadter, Douglas

Douglas Hofstadter wrote _[Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden
Braid](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%B6del,_Escher,_Bach)_. It is an
absolutely fascinating look at meaning and self-reference. I really need to
read it again and see if I can understand it next time. For those those who
read _GEB_ and, like myself, are left perplexed, there's always his _I Am a
Strange Loop_, which explains some of the underlying ideas in a much clearer
format, although missing quite a bit of the entertainment value and
acid-tripesque quality of _GEB_.

Sam Harris, in _Waking Up_, takes Hoftstadter to task over a passage in which
Hoftstadter dismisses as childish Douglas Harding's musings on "having no
head". You can find Harris's defense of headlessness on p. 144 of _Waking Up_,
and Hofstadter's attack on headlessness on pp. 23-33 of Hofstadter and
Dennett's _The Mind's I: Fantasies and Reflections on Self and Soul_ (Basic
Books, 1981). 

# HyperCard

[HyperCard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HyperCard) was a really neat program
that used to ship on Mac computers, but now it is gone. There's an interesting
[conspiracy
theory](https://apple.slashdot.org/story/11/11/30/1720214/why-was-hypercard-killed)
about it. Thanks to growing up with a couple 1983 Macs in the house, I got to
experience HyperCard before we had the internet in the house. You could make
little objects move about, and factor numbers, and produce lists of prime
numbers, or what have you. Kids today don't have that chance. Rest in peace,
HyperCard.

# Jaynes, Julian

Perhaps one of the more puzzling and interesting books I've ever read is Julian
Jaynes's _The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind_.
Drawing extensively on ancient literature, Jaynes outlines a theory of what
consciousness is, where it came from, and how very ancient and more modern
people's minds differ. I find it impossible to accept that his theory is
correct -- it seems outlandish and difficult to prove -- but it's difficult not
to think that Jaynes was on to _something_.

# Jimmy

The English name *Jimmy* must be derived from *Jim*. And *Jim*, in turn, is a
nickname for *James*. In older English, James was spelled *Iames*, before "J"
was invented. That came from the French name *Iames*. The *-co-* just got
swallowed up in the shortening, while the *-es* is just a common way for Old
French masculine words to end. The French name, in turn, was a shortened
version of the Vulgar Latin *Iacomus*. *Iacomus*, in turn, was a modified
version of *Iacobus*, as it appeared in Late Latin. The Latin term comes from
Greek Ἰάκωβος, *Iakobos*. And that comes from the Hebrew יַעֲקֹב, which is
pronounced something like *Yaʿakov*. 

*Yaʿakov* to "Jimmy" is a long march, but it happens little by little.

# Life before the internet

I was born in 1991, and am seventeen years older than my youngest brother. In
some ways we were raised similarly, but there's one major difference. I first
had internet access at home when I was sixteen or so, while he has never known
a world without the internet present. I am, from his standpoint, a dinosaur.

When I was perhaps ten, we got our first pair of computers, two Macs from 1983
which couldn't connect to the internet or display color, but which worked fine
and booted up in a few seconds. Most importantly, they had HyperCard, which me
and another brother used to learn some rudimentary programming skills. Later,
another computer, also old and unable to connect to the internet, allowed us to
start messing around with Visual Basic. Internet connections, for me, came from
the library. At fifteen, I started a website, oriented around religious topics.
I paid for web hosting by check. I made my files in HTML, first raw and later
with a free WYSIWYG editor called CoffeeCup. Because I still didn't have the
internet at home, I would take a flash drive to a public library computer, and
each time I wanted to update the website I would install a program on the
library computer that could handle FTP transfers, send my HTML files off to the
internet, and leave them there.

I learned about BASIC and HTML through physical books at public libraries, and
would take a bus to get there. To make the money that paid for the web hosting
and other things, I would deliver pizza, which I did without a cell phone or
GPS. I had a physical map of my hometown, used flashcards to memorize the
locations of all the streets, and that was that. None of this would make any
sense to people ten years younger.

# Life expectancy: <br>average was not typical till recently

It is often said that, in 1850 or two thousand years ago or whenever, life
expectancy was 28, or 43, or what have you, and that therefore a 25-five-year-old
was "old" in those days. This is then used to make some sort of observation
about early marriage, or divorce, or life insurance, or some other topic. This
line of talking contains one truth and one major misconception, and it revolves
around a confusion of the typical with the mathematical average (mean).

Consider the case of a hypothetical society in which half of the people who are
born die at two years old of the, say, _two-year-old flu_, while the other half
survive their toldlerhood and die at sixty-eight. We would not say, in a
society like that, that a thirty-three-year-old was an old person, with two
years left to live. A thirty-three-year-old would still be fairly young. That
hypothetical world is in fact very much like how the world was before 1800. 
While there were significantly higher mortality rates across the lifespan, 
mortality was concentrated in young children. Once one reached adulthood, 
a fully normal lifespan was entirely plausible. While the _average_ person may 
have died around thirty, the _typical_ person didn't die at thirty: they died
quite a bit earlier or quite a bit later.

# Life expectancy: <br>most people beat it these days

One might be forgiven for thinking that life expectancy is how long a person
can expect to live. As a crude approximation, that's right. But life expectancy
is a product of current statistics, not a product of an intelligent forecast.
Right now, as of 2020, there is a death rate for each age. So many one
year-olds die out of the whole population, so many two-year-olds die out of the
whole population, and so on.

The statistic we call a life expectancy is based on how long a person currently
alive might be expected to live _on the assumption that today's numbers stay
the same into the future_. But for the last two hundred years or so, today's
numbers _don't_ usually hold true into the future. Death rates have usually
been dropping, which means that life expectancy has usually been an
_underestimate_ of how long a person will live.

# Logical quotations

I am a proud American, and I love my country. Still, I don't like what we do
with quotation marks, where commas and other bits that aren't part of the
quotation in any logical sense. In the ongoing effort to promote a more perfect
union for ourselves and our posterity, I plan on using [logical
quotation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style#Punctuation_inside_or_outside)
whenever I can get away with it.

# Malthus, Thomas

[Thomas Malthus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Robert_Malthus#An_Essay_on_the_Principle_of_Population) noticed that, if human population grows exponentially in the 
presence of sufficient food, no amount of resources can be sufficient for 
long. Any population with a surplus of food will simply grow until the food 
becomes scarce enough to constrain population growth. In Malthus' thinking, 
then, there was no point to any attempt at easing the position of the poor. 
They would simply reproduce away any surplus one might give them, and then 
you'd be left with a larger population, as miserable as ever. If you were 
somehow to double the output of England's farms, human population could easily 
double in the next twenty-five years and the poor would once again be 
balancing on the knife's edge of hunger.

Malthus published his _[Essay](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/An_Essay_on_the_Principle_of_Population)_ 
in 1798, and if one looks backward, his basic thesis was true for the entire 
history of humanity up to his time. By and large, humans prior to 1800 or so 
lived at the subsistence level, at least since the Neolithic revolution, and 
wherever there was plenty population increased until there was not. Econimists 
have since filled out the picture with perhaps more variables than Malthus 
expected, but there was quite a bit of truth to his picture of stagnant living 
standards. According to Table 1-2 of Angus Maddison's _The World Economy: A 
Millennial Perspective_, in 1990 international dollars world GDP per capita 
was $444 in 0 AD. (Ignore the fact that there was no such year; Maddison's 
book treats it as existing.) By 1000 AD, almost no change had occurred. Food 
production and population had risen about 15%, but real income was flat at 
$435. By 1820, a little movement had occurred. Incomes were up to $667. 

A Malthusian outlook might than expect population to rise, and population did 
in fact rise. Taking for a minute the data at
[Worldometer](https://www.worldometers.info/world-population/world-population-by-year/) 
for convenience, world population roughly doubled between 1804 and 1927. 
Between 1927 and 1974, it doubled again. Since 1974, it has very nearly 
doubled again. As an empirical matter, we can say that food production is 
capable of growing much more quickly than Malthus imagined. And despite the 
growth in population, income has sky-rocketed. Returning to Maddison's table, 
it has grown from $667 in 1820 to $5,709 in 1998. A chart from the [World Bank], 
using a slightly different definition of "dollar", puts global GDP per capita 
at $5,273 in 1998, rising to $11,429 today. Roughly speaking, income per person 
has grown nineteen-fold since 1820 despite a great deal of population growth. 

The production of calories, as it turns out, has been a more tractable problem 
than previously imagined. And we appear to be escaping the Malthusian trap 
the other side as well: human fertility is falling. In the 1950's and 1960's, 
TFR (a statistic than approximately captures "children per woman per lifetime") 
stood at about 5, but has since dropped to below 2.5. According to the 
Worldometers table, the global population growth rate peaked at 2.09% in 1968-9 
and has been dropping since. It now stands at 1.05%, and the UN Projects it 
to reach zero [around
2100](https://population.un.org/wpp/Graphs/Probabilistic/POP/TOT/900).

Malthus was working with the history that existed up to 1798. It would have 
been very difficult to anticipate that both food production and human 
reproduction would start growing in ways different from anything ever seen 
before. And it is possible that Thomas Malthus himself contributed to the 
human exit from the Malthusian trap. Perhaps, without Malthus' warnings, 
people would not have embraced agricultural technology and contraception 
to the extent that they have. 

# National population

If you want to understand the world, it helps to have an idea of how many people live in all the various places. [According to Lawrence Krauss](https://quillette.com/2020/11/23/why-is-scientific-illiteracy-so-acceptable/) about thirty-five person of his students at Yale think the United States has less than ten million inhabitants. If it's that bad at Yale, it's probably much worse in the general population. So here's a brief rule of thumb, and some suggested best practices.

First, global population: a bit under 8 billion. So any group of 80 million people is about 1\% of the world.

First, it's good to have some idea about the big groupings of humans that 
are around a billion or two people. Two countries: China, and India, each have 
more than a billion people: about 1.4 billion for both. The entire continent 
of Africa likewise has about 1.4 billion people. While "Europe" is a little 
fuzzy to define, it has about 700 million -- so India and China are each 
about twice the size of Europe by population.

North America has little under 600 million inhabitants -- this includes Mexico 
and Central America. Meanwhile, South America has about 430 million 
inhabitants. On the other hand, if you want to divide the Americas into 
English-speaking countries and Latin America, there's about 370 million 
Americans and Canadians and 650 million people in Latin America. There's about 
600 million people in the Middle East and North Africa.

The Middle East, incidentally, is not where most Muslims live. There are about 
1.8 billion Muslims, making that religion just a bit smaller than the 2.3 
billion Christians. And the 4.1 million Muslims and Christians, therefore, 
make up a little over half the world. The next largest groups are Hinduism, 
with 1.2 billion adherents -- this group is largely but not entirely 
coterminous with the population of India -- and 500 million Buddhists, about half in China, with the rest elsewhere. All other religions are considerably smaller.

Let's return to countries. After India and China, the largest country is the United States, with 330 million people. For quick mental math, you can round it to 320, which has the advantage of being divisible by 80, which is about how long people in the United States live. So, dividing across ages, we could very roughly guess that are about 4 million one-year-olds, four million two-year-olds, etc. How many high-schoolers? Well, that's a four-year period, so about 16 million.
Real numbers will vary, but that should give a rough sense of proportion.

Moving quickly through the next countries, Indonesia, Pakistan, and Brazil all 
have between two and three hundred million inhabitants. Bangladesh and Russia 
have about 170 and 150, respectively. Mexico and Japan are near 125 million. 
The Philipines, DRC, Egypt, Ethiopia, and Vietnam all have about 100 million, 
while Iran, Turkey, and Germany are all at about 80. France, the UK, Thailand, Italy, Thailand, South Africa, and Tanzania are all in the ballpark of 60 million. 

Everything else is smaller.

# Pinker, Steven

Steven Pinker, in addition to his career as a psycholinguist, wrote _The Better
Angels of Our Nature_ (2011), which chronicles the long-term reduction in
violence that has occurred across human history. He followed this up with
_Enlightenment Now_ (2018), which follows similar improvements across many
other domains. Other books of his include _The Language Instinct_, _How the
Mind Works_, and _The Sense of Style_.

# Poverty: good luck measuring it

I spent the first sixteen years of my life in a household underneath the income
level that the United States government calls "the poverty line". And there was
some truth to it -- there was not a whole lot of money floating around the
household. And now I live a comfortable middle-class existence, my brothers
include a doctor and a lawyer, my three sisters are in college and on the path
to bachelors' degrees, and the two boys still under eighteen are both on a
promising path themselves. And yet the Powells are by no means an inspirational
story of overcoming poverty, because we never really lived with the package of
issues commonly known as poverty, at least not for the most part.

Among other things, both of my parents have bachelors degrees, all four
grandparents are or were college-educated, two of the grandparents having
master's degrees. Before I entered the public school system in the sixth grade,
I had learned algebra from my father, learned to do square roots by hand from
my grandfather, and done fairly well in a college geology class I audited. My
parents were and are happily married throughout my childhood and after, I had
access to excellent schooling, and my childhood was free of the evictions, debt
collectors, and financial desperation that tend to characterize poverty.

We spoke middle-class English at home --  double negatives and non-standard 
past tenses were nowhere to be found,
and, unlike half of Harvard graduates, every Powell child probably knows that
seasons are caused by the tilt of the earth's axis. We can all -- including the
one Powell sibling who has frequent psychotic episodes -- walk into a job
interview without worrying about making the kinds of subtle class tells that
many of our childhood neighbors have to worry about.

We were, in short, raised in a middle-class family that happened to be poor.
When a Raj Chetty or some other social scientist 
combs through data on social mobility, the Powells will
probably be counted as an exceptionally upwardly mobile "poor" family. I
suspect that a fair number of the "high-achieving poor", if looked at
carefully, are cases like ours. The data on social mobility may exaggerate how
easy it is to escape poverty.

This sort of thing is part of why I distrust the tendency in academic
publishing to use the term "socio-economic status" when "income" is really
meant. Even when we lived in a low-income neighborhood, we were always in some
sense tourists in poverty, placed there by religious beliefs that caused my
parents to have nine children and to make different career decisions than most
mothers and fathers do. We were, in fact, raised in privilege, not compared to
the American upper-middle class by any stretch, but definitely in comparison to
most children in Cincinnati's Price Hill. 

All this is to say, when you talk about poverty, try and think about what you
mean. Income is part of it, but so is education, dialect, neighborhood, family
structure, and worldview. And it wouldn't hurt to read _Hillbilly Elegy_.

# Project Euler

In middle school and high school, I was what some might call a _mathlete_, one of
the kids who was always running about to school math competitions. Lindsay
Lohan introduces the concept
[here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EligNcjdyyI). Back in 2006, I somehow
stumbled into being one of six Ohio high schoolers to qualify for the USAMO
([source](https://www.maa.org/math-competitions/2006-usamo-qualifiers-by-state#oh)),
where I immediately found myself out of my depth and got something like two out
of forty-two questions correct. I don't remember the exact figure.

Anyhow, around age 15 I got swept into studying the Hebrew Bible, which I kept
picking away at until 21, and mostly left math behind. However, last year I did
pick up playing around with math questions again, with Project Euler, which
combines math and programming to produce puzzles to solve. If you're a former
mathlete who needs a little mental stimulation now and then, you might want to
give Project Euler a look. The questions are graduated in difficulty, running
from the very first problem, which has been solved by 965,090 users, to some of
the latest, with less than 200 users solving.

# Reading direction in English

It is a commonplace claim, and almost entirely true, that Hebrew is read from
right to left, while English is read from left to right. But read this: "\$5".
If you read it as "five dollars", you read the item on the right, then the item
on the left. Language rules are made to be broken.

# Regression to the mean

Suppose you take a population and look at, say, a group of people with very
high math scores -- perhaps they average at the 95th percentile for the general
population. Then look at their children. You'll find that those children tend
to score above average in math scores, but not, on average, as high as their
parents. A similar phenomenon will be found if you select people with very low
math scores -- their children will also tend to have lower math scores than
average, but higher than their parents.

The point where this becomes counter-intuitive is that it works in both
directions. If you take a group of children whose math scores deviate from the
average -- above or below -- *their* parents will, on average, be closer to the
average than their children. If you don't have an understanding of how
regression works, you'll misunderstand some things: examples can be found on
the [Wikipedia
page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regression_toward_the_mean#Misunderstandings).

# Singapore's economy

Lee Kuan Yew, the first leader of modern Singapore, held various positions in
government from 1959 to his death in 2015. In 1960, Singapore's GDP per capita,
measured in 2018 US dollars, was $428. Upon his death in 2015, it was $55,646,
a 130-fold increase
([source](https://www.google.com/search?channel=fs&client=ubuntu&q=singapore+gdp+per+capita)).
To the best of my knowledge, there is no other country with a growth record
exceeding that. A worthwhile read is Lee Kuan Yew's autobiography, _The
Singapore Story: Memoirs of Lee Kuan Yew_. 

# Velikovsky, Immanuel

One of the many interesting curiosities that my late grandfather Henderson
pointed me towards was book called _Worlds in Collision_ by the extraordinarily
eccentric Immanuel Velikovsky, who combined a creative and well-read mind with
a fundamental inability to understand how the real world works and produced
fascinating attempts at re-writing history. If you enjoy that sort of thing,
you might enjoy _Worlds in Collision_.

# Venezuela

With a few very brief exceptions, I spent the first five years of my life in
Venezuela, which was a more or less functional country in the early 1990's. It
had poverty, it had violence, and it had corruption, but the stores generally
had food in them, the water was turned on at least part of the day, and one
could walk around Venezuela for ten years through some fairly rough
neighborhoods on a regular basis and only have a gun pointed at one twice. My
family continues to have friends who live in the slums of Caracas, and the
incredibly bleak picture of starvation, hyperinflation, and mass flight from
the country that you often see in media outlets is accurate.

The descent into total dysfunction did not happen all at once. One might date
it from the time when Hugo Chávez declared an "economic war" on 2010-6-2, or to
the accession of Venezuelan President and now dictator Nicolás Maduro in 2013.
In any case, the vicious sociopath currently oppressing Venezuela has shown
every indication throughout his entire tenure that he is fully prepared to
starve people out of the country until Venezuela is emptied or he is dead.

# Vim

*2020-11-21*

For years, my answer to "Vim or Emacs" has been "Whatever the default text
editor in Ubuntu is -- is it still gedit?" However, a brother of mine has
informed me that it's time to start acting like a grown-up and learn my way
around Vim. So far, I've found that having to constantly look up the shortcuts
makes the whole editing process inefficient, but I'm told that all those will
eventually settle into my thick skull and everything will be quite smooth. Back
in the eighth grade, I was informed by a typing teacher that it's not really
the keyboard so much as it is the mouse that leads to repetitive stress
injuries. Whether it's true or not, I do tend to find moving from keyboard to
mouse annoying.

# WP:PAG

I used to edit quite a bit for Wikipedia, until I got tired of it. In that
time, I became familiar with Wikipedia's Policies and Guidelines, known by the
shortcut
[WP:PAG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Policies_and_guidelines). If
you ever wondered how such a massive site maintains a more or less consistent
styles and keeps a pretty decent quality, WP:PAG is part of it.

# XKCD

The classic "webcomic of romance, sarcasm, math, and language" needs no
introduction, unless you've never heard of it. You can find it
[here](https://xkcd.com/) and in-depth explanations of the jokes
[here](https://www.explainxkcd.com/wiki/index.php/Main_Page).

---
_This page is released under the [CC0
1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) license._

