---
title: Romanies and Ashkenazim in History
description: A School Paper
layout: page
---

*Written in 2017; placed online in 2020 with minor revisions.*

## Table of Contents
* TOC
{:toc}

## Preface for the Internet

The giant wall of text below is a school paper I turned in July 2017 as what
Thomas Edison State University calls a "capstone project", which the equivalent
of what some colleges would refer to as a "senior thesis", the final paper
written by any student seeking a B.A. The format required was perhaps a bit too
scientific-shaped for what was essentially a history paper, and its layout
forced some redundancy into the paper. You may also notice that I'm continually
referring to the thing as a "study", which I don't really think is a great
description of what is essentially an essay. Had I written this essay
originally for the internet, I would not have tried to justify my practice of
reading a bunch of interesting books and then writing about what I had read as
a "methodology", but this is what the assignment required, and so that is what
the assignment got.

It's not a page-turner, but since there doesn't seem to be much material out
there comparing Ashkenazi and Romani history in depth, I thought it might be
worth putting up onto the internet so that perhaps someone Googling one search
term or another might find it and follow the references to some useful books.

I have done some light copy-editing, and the title page has been altered, but
other than that this is basically identical to the paper I submitted on July
22, 2017.

## Title and Such

Romanies and Ashkenzim in History

Mitchell Powell

Thomas Edison State University

July 22, 2017

## Abstract

This study compares the histories of Romanies and Ashkenazim over the past
millennium, from their first appearance in Europe to the present day. Using
historical records and modern ethnographic data, it seeks to compare and
contrast the way that historical factors have contributed to the present
socioeconomic positions of both groups. Deep similarities exist between the two
groups, and between the approaches to both groups taken by surrounding European
cultures and governments. These similarities include purity cultures and
internal legal systems, as well as endogamy. Long-standing economic differences
exist as well, extending from the earliest records of both groups to the
present, and reinforced by differences in policy toward Ashkenazim and
Romanies. These differences include occupational distinctions, literacy, the
stringency of the purity cultures, and religious differences. This study argues
that any evaluation of the present status of particular Romani or Ashkenazi
groups must take into account the deep differences caused by hundreds of years
of history.

## 1. Introduction

### Romanies and Ashkenazim in History

This thesis seeks to compare and contrast the histories of two minorities in
Europe, both living primarily in Eastern Europe and Russia, during the period
from approximately 1000 CE to the present. It focuses on the histories of
Ashkenazi Jews and Romani people from their earliest presence in Europe, and
includes a literature review. Using a variety of primary and secondary sources,
this project discusses the similarities and differences between the historical
experience of both groups up to the present. From their arrival in the latter
part of the Early Medieval Period (just prior to 1000), both groups begin a
complex history of development and often tense relationships with surrounding
peoples. Echoes of the medieval and early modern experiences of both groups
still influence them today. By examining the commonalities and distinctions
between these two ethnic groups, this project aims to shed light on the
historical development of both.

#### Background

Both tradition and genetic data indicate that ancestors of Ashkenazi Jews
migrated to Europe from the Middle East (Ostrer, 2012, pp. 93-94). The genetic
data indicates that the ancestors of Ashkenazim derive from an admixture of
Middle Eastern and Southern European ancestry, arriving in the Rhineland at
some point definitely prior to the twelfth century (Costa et al., 2013), and
most likely in the ninth century (Ostrer, 2012, p. 21). After their arrival in
the Rhineland, Ashkenazim lived for centuries without significant intermarriage
to local populations (Cochran & Harpending, 2009, p. 219). Ashkenazim lived as
a scattered minority throughout Eastern Europe and Russia, primarily in urban
environments where they worked in trade and finance (Cochran & Harpending,
2009, pp. 196-198). Their religious literature indicates a strong interest in
maintaining ritual purity, through restrictions on eating, dress, and marriage
laws, as evidenced in the Talmud and the _Shulchan Aruch_, standard legal codes
held in common by Orthodox Jews. Despite discriminatory policies, and even
expulsions, throughout the medieval and early modern eras, Ashkenazim came to
be drastically overrepresented in academic achievement (Cochran, Hardy, &
Harpending, 2005). In World War II, Nazi Germany attempted the extermination of
Jews, and as a result most Ashkenazim today live in the United States or
Israel. Jewish populations throughout the world continue to suffer from
anti-Semitic attacks to the present.

Despite folk beliefs that the Romanies originated in Egypt, genetic analysis
indicates that the Romanies are of Indian origin, and that they appear to be
most closely related to castes in India which were traditionally oppressed and
forced into marginal economic positions (Raj et al., 2012). Since their arrival
in Europe, Romanies have been associated with a nomadic lifestyle (Tavani,
2012, p. 27), and historically have suffered from widespread discrimination
(Möschel, 2014, p. 141). As was the case with Ashkenazim, Romanies were
repeatedly expelled from various parts of Europe (Stauber & Vago, 2007, p.
124). In contrast to the extensive literature produced by Ashkenazi Jews,
written Romani literature does not appear until the twentieth century
(Cederberg, 2006, pp. 121-22). Like Ashkenazim, Romanies were targeted in the
holocaust (von dem Knesebeck, 2011). At present, the Romani community continues
to suffer from high rates of poverty and illiteracy (Vermeersch, 2006, pp.
97-99), and widespread discrimination against Romanies continues throughout
Europe (Feischmidt, Szombati, & Szuhay, 2014, p. 184).

#### Problem Statement

How does the history of Ashkenazi Judaism, from roughly 1000 CE to the present,
primarily in Eastern Europe and Russia, compare to the history of the Romanies
(commonly referred to as “Gypsy”) people in the same area and period? This
broader question will be addressed by means of a series of more narrowly
focused sub-questions:

1. In what ways are the earliest origins of both peoples in Europe similar and
   different?

2. In what ways have internal factors (such as Ashkenazi and Romani culture)
   and external factors (such as outside policies towards Jews and Romanies)
contributed to both groups maintaining a distinct cultural identity?

3. How have European cultures and governments responded to the presence of
   Ashkenazi and Romani people in Eastern Europe?

4. What differences in the history of the two groups have contributed to the
   very different situations of Ashkenazim and Romanies in the modern world?

#### Significance

The history of Judaism has received wide coverage, and departments of Jewish
Studies exist at many universities (“AJS Directory”). The less-studied field of
Romani Studies has been growing more recently, only becoming an “established
field” in the past two or three decades (Surdu, 2016, p. 205). In both cases,
historians work to understand the history of a minority culture which survived
for centuries after migrating into Eastern Europe, despite an often fraught
relationship with surrounding cultures. Comparing and contrasting the history
of these two minorities brings these two fields of historical study into
dialogue, and allows for a greater understanding of the historical factors
which continue to influence inter-ethnic relationships in Europe, and shed
light on the Ashkenazi and Romani diasporas in the present.

#### Overview of Methodology

This thesis undertakes the comparison of Ashkenazi and Romani history by means
of a broad review of primary and secondary historical sources relating to both
ethnicities, in order to address the four sub-questions mentioned above. In the
discussion of the earliest origins of both groups, which will include the
arrival of both groups in Europe, recent genetic data is also consulted. The
history of Ashkenazi culture is well-documented in both Jewish and non-Jewish
sources. Unfortunately, Romani literature begins in the twentieth century, and
Romani culture has historically been oral rather than literate (Cederberg,
2006, pp. 121-22). As a result, what can be said about Romani culture prior to
the twentieth century will have to be reconstructed by means of outside sources
and through the observation of cultural traditions among modern Romanies.


#### Delimitations

This project does not attempt to discuss the Jewish experience as a whole, but
focuses on the experience of Ashkenazi Jews, a specific sub-set of Jewish
populations, whose historical experience shares commonalities with Romani
people. This project will focus entirely on cultural and historical factors
impacting Ashkenazi and Romani people, and will not delve into the literature
which debates whether Ashkenazi genetics have been selected for higher
intelligence by their experience in the medieval period (Cochran & Harpending,
2009; Vogel & Motulsky, 2007). This project will not attempt to evaluate or
promote specific policies aimed at combating anti-Semitism or promoting the
economic and social status of Romani people. Instead of focusing on such
normative questions, this thesis is descriptive only, seeking to describe the
impact of historical factors on Ashkenazi and Romani populations. This project
focuses on the history of Ashkenazi and Romani people in Central and Eastern
Europe as well as Russia. It will briefly mention the history of the groups
which gave rise to Romanies and Ashkenazim, but will not try to evaluate the
pre-European historical experience of either group in depth. Because of the
lack of literature produced by Romanies prior to the twentieth century, their
history will be reconstructed using only outside sources.

Due to World War II, the largest population of Ashkenazim today is in the
United States, followed by Israel. In discussion of the present economic and
social position of Ashkenazim, it will be necessary to refer to the position of
Ashkenazim in the United States and Israel, but it is outside the scope of this
thesis to evaluate the complex historical situations of the Ashkenazi and
Romani diaspora outside of Europe. For the sake of brevity and focus, many of
these significant and worthwhile historical and political questions will be
ignored in order to focus on the specific historical questions that motivate
this thesis.

#### Definition of Terms

This project uses several terms which are uncommon or used here in a
specialized sense. For clarity, these terms are defined below.

* “Ashkenazi” refers to the population of Jewish people descended from the
  Jewish settlement in the Rhineland and later in Poland and surrounding
countries, and the descendants of this population, who have historically lived
in  Central and Eastern Europe and Russia. Today, over 80% of the world’s
Jewish population is of Ashkenazi origin (Clark 2014, p. 236), and the American
Jewish population is “almost entirely of Ashkenazi origin” (Vogel & Motulsky,
1997, p. 706). As a result, statistics and descriptions which refer to “Jews”
generally, or to “Jews” in the United States and Central and Eastern Europe,
even without specifying Ashkenazi ancestry, refer implicitly to predominantly
Ashkenazi populations. The exception to this pattern is in Israel, where only
45% of the Jewish population is of Ashkenazi origin (Arian, 2008, p. 324).

* “Ashkenazim” is the plural term for members of this population. Alternately,
  members of this population may be referred to as Ashkenazi Jews.

* “Ethnography” is the study of ethnic groups.

* The term “Europe,” as used in this study, is inclusive of Russia, which is
  part of the area in which both Ashkenazi and Romani people have historically
settled.

* “Romani” is a singular term for a person of Romani ancestry, whether male or
  female.  In other literature, the term “Rom” is sometimes used.

* “Romani,” as the adjective “Romani” or the noun “the Romani,” also refers to
  the ethnic group as a whole which is more commonly known as Gypsy, a term
which is avoided in this project due to its sometimes derogatory connotations,
although depending on the community it is sometimes an accepted term. In other
literature, the ethnic group as a whole may also be referred as “the Rom”,
“Rrom,” “Roma,” “Rroma,” “Romani,” “Romany” or “Rromani.”

* “Romanies” is a plural noun for individuals of Romani origin. Other spellings
  and usages exist, and may appear in quotations, such as “Roma,” “Rroma,”
“Romany,” “Romanies,” or “Gypsies.”

#### Summary

As two living cultures, both of which were targeted in the largest genocide of
modern times, Ashkenazi and Romani populations provide a worthy opportunity for
comparative ethnography. This thesis will trace the ways in which both ethnic
groups originated and developed through the medieval and modern periods, using
the historical data to help explain the present state of both groups. By means
of comparisons drawn from the histories of both groups, this thesis sheds
additional light on the history of Europe, on relations between majority and
minority groups, and on the cultural and political forces that have shaped the
modern world.

## 2. Literature Review

The history of Judaism and Jews has been addressed by innumerable authors. This
is unsurprising, given the overrepresentation of Jewish people in academic
fields, and the significance of the holocaust in modern history. This
literature review will not attempt to retrace this literature in any great
depth, but will primarily use Jewish history as a basis for comparison and
contrast with a much less often studied ethnic group: Romanies. As recently as
1991, the prominent Romani scholar Ian Hancock lamented that works dealing with
Romani “social issues . . . may be counted on the fingers of one hand” (p. 3),
although more recently the field is growing (Matras, 2015, pp. 34-35).

In addition to books and articles focusing specifically on Ashkenazi or Romani
history and culture, literature on the social mobility of ethnic groups is also
consulted to illuminate similarities and divergences between Ashkenazi and
Romani people now and historically in Eastern Europe. References are made to
the primary sources concerning Jewish and Romani history. In the case of
Judaism, primary sources both by and about Jews extend back over two thousand
years. Sources about the Romanies emerge less than one millennium in the past
(Crowe, 2007, p. xvii), and sources by Romanies are even more recent, with
significant Romani literature beginning in the 1920’s (Cederberg, 2006, pp.
121-122).

### Origins of the Ashkenazi Population

Despite a long tradition of Jewish literacy, the Ashkenazi community did not
keep any literary evidence of its original migration to Eastern Europe (Clark,
2014, p. 236). Since their arrival, genetic evidence indicates a low rate of
intermarriage with outsiders. These studies have indicated that despite
approximately a millennium of occupying Eastern Europe, only 5-8% of paternal
DNA in Ashkenazi males comes from non-Jewish European ancestry (Clark, 2014, p.
237). By the twelfth century they had arrived in the Rhineland, along today’s
German-French border (Costa et al., 2013), and later as their population grew
from Germany into Poland-Lithuania (Bartal, 2005, p. 15).

The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth was formed in 1368 (Frost, 2015, p. 50), and
by the time its breakup in 1772, its Ashkenazi population made up a numerical
majority of the Jews of Europe (Bartal, 2005, p. 1). These “Polish” Jews
retained a significant degree of German culture (Bartal, 2005, p. 15), and
maintained their distinction from the broader Polish culture (p. 16). 

### Origins of the Romani Population

The name _Rom(a)_ may derive from _Ḍom_, a landless caste in India who
frequently lived in a migratory pattern (Matras, 2015, p. 18). An alternate
hypothesis sees the Romani people emerging from the intermingling of several
different Indian peoples living in Persia (Kenrick, 2004). Modern genetics has
confirmed that Romanies are closely related traditionally to Scheduled Castes,
the lowest-status groups in the traditional Hindu caste system (Rai et al.,
2012). Linguistic evidence indicates that Romanies stayed for a time in Greece
as they migrated westward, before moving into Eastern Europe (Matras, 2015, p.
19). Scholars place the arrival of Romani people in Europe in the thirteenth
century (Hancock 1991, p. 4) or as early as the eleventh (2007, p. xvii).

While Romanies generally hail from India, economic historian Gregory Clark
argues that this is not the case for the United Kingdom’s “Gypsy or Traveller”
(Romanichal) people, who are ethnically British (2014, p. 240-43). Clark
suggests that because of a lack of the visible features (darker skin, facial
shape) common to other Romani groups, the “Gypsies” of England have seen large
amounts of turn-over through the generations as people move from “Gypsy” life
to mainstream society and vice versa (2014, p. 244). Unlike Romani populations
in continental Europe, there have been no genetic studies of English “Gypsies,”
so it remains to be seen whether such testing will vindicate Clark’s
interpretation (2014, p. 243).

### Historical Ashkenazi Socioeconomic Status

Ashkenazi Jews “are longstanding elites of a millennium or more” (Clark, 2014,
p. 10). Despite a long history of persecutions and anti-Semitism, the
demographic estimates implied by the majority view of Ashkenazi origins imply a
population growth rate of over 50% each generation, an “extraordinary” rate
given the stagnant populations of medieval Europe, rates similar to elite
groups in England (Clark, 2014, p. 236). 

In the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries, the Jewish community was an
international one, with travel, and trade crossing national boundaries (Katz,
1993, p. 7). While Jewish communities were internationally connected, locally
Jews were segregated from the broader Christian population into segregated
communities (sometimes referred to as “ghettos”), with almost the entire
Ashkenazi population being restricted to particular parts of any given town or
city (Katz, 1993, p. 11). In addition to physical separation, Jews were
distinguished by speaking Yiddish and by their different clothing and
hair-covering practices (Katz, 1993, p. 12). 

Ashkenazi Jews were regarded as a “foreign” group in late medieval and early
modern Europe, and were allowed to live in any area only by special permission
of the local rulers, and not by legal right (Katz, 1993, p. 13). It was a
generally accepted legal principle that rulers could revoke this permission at
will and expel the local Jews, as sometimes occurred (Katz, 1993, pp. 14-16).
Despite the precarious nature of Jewish residency rights, they were nonetheless
encouraged to settle in the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth because the Polish
landed classes needed financing and help administering their financial affairs
(Katz, 1993, p. 15). As the Polish nobility founded new towns in previously
rural areas, their Jewish guests began to rent land from the nobles, which they
used to manage a wide variety of agricultural and other economic enterprises
(Bartal, 2005, p. 17). By the sixteenth century, Poland-Lithuania had become
the cultural center of Ashkenazi Judaism (Bartal, 2005, p. 18). Economically,
the Polish Jews were granted wide autonomy in terms of tax collection (Bartal,
2005, p. 21), and functioned as an elite class one step below the Christian
nobility (Bartal, 2005, p. 159-161).

Intermediate in status between the land-owning nobility, which lived on rents,
the peasantry, which survived through subsistence farming, Ashkenazi Jews came
to dominate trade and finance in Eastern and Central Europe, not only in
Poland-Lithuania but also in Germany. As a result, it became a popular
stereotype that skill in business was “a uniquely Jewish characteristic” (Katz,
1993, p. 45). Because Jews did not own rural land, and because they did not
have a recognized right to inhabit any part of Europe, they were politically
powerless in a way that made them non-threatening to rulers. Paradoxically,
this made rulers feel safe in entrusting economic responsibility to Jewish
hands, contributing to Jewish economic success (Katz, 1993, p. 46). 

The unique socioeconomic role of Ashkenazi Jews in the medieval world is summed
up by Cochran, Hardy, and Harpending as follows: “For 800–900 years, from
roughly AD 800 to AD 1650 or 1700, the great majority of the Ashkenazi Jews had
managerial and financial jobs, jobs of high complexity, and were neither
farmers nor craftsmen. In this they differed from all other settled peoples of
which we have knowledge” (2006, p. 670).

### Historical Romani Socioeconomic Status

Since the fourteenth century, observers have noticed that Romani people have
tended not to have regular employment (Matras, 2015, p. 8). Nevertheless,
Romani people traditionally had skills in metalworking and other economically
valuable crafts, as a result of which they were widely enslaved (Matras, 2015,
pp. 160-163). In the fourteenth, Romani slaves were being imported into what is
now Romania (Matras, 2015, p. 23). Romanies were kept as slaves in Romania
continuously until Romani slavery was finally abolished in the mid-nineteenth
century (Crowe, 2007, p. xviii).

Stereotypically, “Gypsies” are associated with a nomadic lifestyle. While this
is in fact not an accurate description as most Romani have historically lived
in permanent settlements (Matras, 2015, p. 41), it does carry an element of
truth. Historically, repeated expulsions by unfriendly local governments forced
many Romani to adapt to life on the move (Hancock, 1991, p. 5). With time,
nomadism became not just a reaction to expulsion, but for many Romani became a
valued and traditional lifestyle (Crowe, 2007, p. 294). As the world has
modernized, many governments have attempted to force nomadic Romani people to
settle, but so far have these efforts have proved unsuccessful (Crowe, 2007,
pp. xviii-xix, 295).

The social life of Romani people has historically been based on kinship ties
between families (Matras, 2015, p. 27). Historically, Romani have not had any
awareness of being a single group coming from a single place, and the various
Romani groups have not had any shared religion or scripture (Matras, 2015, p.
30). Due to the traditional illiteracy of Romani people, memory of historical
events more than one or two generations old has tended to fade (Matras, 2015,
p. 42). However, while history has not been accurately recorded within Romani
society, Romani customary law has been passed down orally, primarily by women,
through the centuries (Weyrauch, 2001, p. 3). As noted above, the English
“Gypsies” are of contested origin, and may not be biologically connected to the
Romani population. However, their economic status has been similar, and they
“have been at the bottom of the economic scale for more than four hundred
years” (Clark, 2014, p. 10).

### Ashkenazi Law and Customs

Traditional Jewish law, observed historically both by Ashkenazim and other
Jews, is referred to as _halakha_ (Katz, 1993). Halakha was a central part of
the way that Jewish society “saw itself as based upon a body of knowledge and a
set of values handed down to it from the past” (Katz, 1993, p. 1). Halakha
developed through a series of works, each commenting on earlier works. The
standard works of halakha include the legal material in the Bible itself (first
millennium BCE), the _Mishnah_ (c. 200 CE), the _Talmud Bavli_ (c. 500 CE), the
_Mishneh Torah_ (twelfth century CE), and the _Shulchan Aruch_ (sixteenth
century) (Carmichael, 2001, pp. 118-120).

Chua and Rubenfeld, in their study of high-achieving minority groups, noted
that traditional Jewish legal exegesis places a high value on impulse control.
They cite the Talmud, Philo, and the standard Jewish legal code known as the
_Shulchan Aruch_ to show the ways in which traditional Jewish thought values
non-impulsive, deliberate behavior (2014, pp. 138-140).

One ongoing concern of halakha is avoiding and purifying oneself from _niddah_,
or ritual pollution (Carmichael, 2001, p. 122). Detailed Jewish laws concerning
ritual purity effectively made it impossible for Jews to share meals with
non-Jews, which created a sense of social distance (Katz, 1993, p. 20). Jewish
law also created a sense of legal distance, as halakha contains prohibitions
against turning over a Jew to non-Jewish authorities for prosecution (Berman,
2016), and even on teaching non-Jews about halakha itself (Feldman, 1993, p.
319).

Though today following halakha is largely a matter of choice for Orthodox Jews,
historically many of the provisions of were legally enforced. Jews were granted
the right to administer their own internal affairs, with powers extending even
to the operation of Jewish-run prisons and the collection of taxes to support
their internal governments (Katz, 1993, p. 65-75). Thus, while powerless in
terms of the political structure of the surrounding society, Jews formed
something of a parallel state within the state, providing self-government
(Katz, 1993, pp. 76-87). Jewish communities also created a range of social,
charitable, and guild institutions (Katz, 1993, pp. 132-140).

### Romani Law and Customs

The customs and practices that make up the traditional Romani way of life are
known as _romanipen_. Like the halakha, romanipen is concerned with the
maintenance of ritual purity, which is safeguarded through a variety of rules
concerning cleanliness, clothing, food preparation, and contact with non-Romani
people, or _gadjes_ (Hancock, 1991, p. 5).

The concern about ritual impurity dates back to India (Hancock, 1991, p. 5),
and the state of defilement that Romani attempt to avoid is called _marimé_
(Carmichael, 2001, p. 122). Because non-Romani people do not follow Romani
purity laws, traditional Romanies to avoid physical contact with non-Romani
people, who are thought to be able to transmit defilement through touch.
Hancock believes that this avoidance behavior has likely contributed to
anti-Roma hostility (1991, p. 6). In addition, detailed purity regulations as
they pertain to food have historically prevented Romani people from sharing
meals with non-Romani (Matras, 2015, pp. 87-90).

Maintenance of ritual purity has been especially difficult in cases where
Romanies come in contact with the legal system. Dogs and cats transmit
defilement, as does nakedness, so being searched by police dogs or
strip-searched is problematic. In addition, the laws of food purity cause
Romanies to starve in prison rather than pollute themselves with food handled
by non-Romanies (Weyrauch, 2001, pp. 6-7). Needless to say, sex and marriage
with non-Romanies is also forbidden under these laws (Carmichael, 2001, p.
121).

Unlike halakha, romanipen has historically been a “strictly oral” phenomenon,
as the Romani people had no written documents of any kind (Matras, 2015, p.
39). It was traditionally kept secret from non-Romani, although there has more
recently been some opening up and publications on Romani law are beginning to
appear (Harris, 2001, pp. ix-x). While it is possible to speak generally about
Romani law, because these traditions have been passed down among scattered
communities without any standard written works throughout the entirety of
Romani history, generalizations about Romani law will almost never apply to all
Romani (Weyrauch, 2001, p. 2). However, evidence for the preservation of the
broad contours of Romani law can be found in the Kaale Gypsies of Finland,
whose version of Romani law is similar to other communities despite four
hundred years of isolation (Weyrauch, 2001, p. 3).

Romanies have not maintained a clergy or organized religion of their own,
although a set of generally accepted beliefs combining Christian and Hindu
ideas is a feature of Roma culture (Hancock, 2002, pp. 74-75). According to
academic historian Yaron Matras, Romanies have usually become members of the
local religion, whether Christian or Muslim, but have maintained their own
beliefs and relied on the local religion primarily to provide funeral services
(2015, p. 118). Outsiders have therefore often viewed Romani religious
adherence to Christianity as superficial (Matras, 2015, p. 118). Nevertheless,
Romani activist Ruth Barnett has called the idea of Romani irreligion “the most
pernicious myth about gypsies” in a recent work devoted to undermining
stereotypes, and insists that most Romanies do in fact attend local
congregations and adhere strongly to the religions that they are formally
associated with (Barnett, 2013, p. 44). These stereotypes historically have had
contradictory effects on relations with Romanies: on the one hand Christian
rulers repeatedly discussed or ordered forced conversion of Romanies on the
theory that they needed religion; on the other, Romanies were often barred from
participation in the sacraments on the theory that they were too non-religious
to participate (Fraser, 1999, pp. 184-185).

### Ashkenazim Since 1900

As a result of the holocaust, the majority of Ashkenazim today live in the
United States or Israel (Tapper, 2016, p. 20). The socioeconomic status and
achievements in both countries tend to follow the same lines observed in
earlier history.  The average net worth of American Jews was $443,000 as of
2004, compared to $99,500 in the general population (Chua & Rubenfeld, 2014, p.
7). Income of American Jewish households averages approximately $98,00 per year
as of 2010, “almost twice the national median” (Chua & Rubenfeld, 2014, p. 43).
In the United States, studies of Ashkenazi surnames have estimated that
Ashkenazi Jews are overrepresented as physicians by a factor of six (Clark,
2014, p. 47). As of 1960, the average Sephardi (non-Ashkenazi) Jewish family in
Israel had a household income of only 48% of the Ashkenazi average, a gap which
has declined somewhat but is still noticeable today (Rattner & Fishman, 1998,
p. 5). Globally, Jews are overrepresented among Nobel Prize winners by a factor
of one hundred, comprising approximately 0.2% of people worldwide but
collecting about 20% of Nobel Prizes (Chua & Rubenfeld, 2014, p. 54).

In modern America, rates of marriage to non-Jews have risen sharply since
around 1970, and as of the end of the twentieth century nearly half of Jewish
marriages were to non-Jews (Clark, 2014, p. 283). In Israel as well,
intermarriage between Ashkenazi and Sephardi Jews has been increasing
(Goldberg, 1996, p. 40).

### The Romani Since 1900

Literature by Romanies was first seriously produced in the Soviet Union in the
1920’s and 30’s (Crowe, 2007, p. xx). The Soviet Union began a widespread push
to integrate Romani people into modern settled life, and to put an end to
nomadism. The effort failed (Crowe, 2007, p. 175). Like Jews, Romani people
were targeted during the holocaust, and large numbers were killed (Mayall,
2004, p. 235). Since then, Romani throughout Europe have continued to live in
“appallingly low social, economic, and educational status” (Crowe, 2007, p.
xxi), and have continued to live in tension with law enforcement (Taylor, 2014,
pp. 187-234).

They continue to be associated with nomadism in the popular imagination, but
about 80% of Romanies in Europe live in permanent settlements (Matras, 2015, p.
25), and less than 3% of American Romanies live in mobile homes (Hancock, 2002,
p. 107).  In Europe, among Romanies who continue to live nomadically or in
caravans, many can only maintain their traditional lifestyle by breaking
Europe’s land use laws, resulting in evictions and conflict with police
(Taylor, 2014, pp. 187-234).

In the United Kingdom fully one-third of Romani adults had never attended
school at all, and of those with some schooling the average student dropped out
at thirteen years of age (Clark, 2014, p. 240). Illiteracy is the norm in many
communities (Matras, 2015, p. 13; Taylor, 2014, pp. 215-16). Despite great
challenges, many Romanies have clung successfully to significant portions of
their traditional culture. Even in the United States, some continue speaking
Romani “four or five generations” after their ancestors immigrated (Matras,
2015, p. 3).

### Conclusion

For approximately a millennium, both Ashkenazim and Romanies have followed
paths that contain clear parallels as well as stark distinctions. Both groups
have struggled with outside prejudice since their arrival in Europe, and have
at times been expelled and murdered by hostile governments. Both Romanies and
Ashkenazim have maintained a history of strict endogamy, with their separation
from outsiders reinforced by concerns about purity and food preparation. Both
cultures have historically been characterized by distinctive patterns of
economic engagement that have distinguished them from the broader society.
Their continued sense of separation from the broader world has been supported
both by the hostile policies of outsiders as well as the inner norms of each
group. In the modern world, Ashkenazi integration has been much more successful
than that of Romanies, who throughout Europe and the United States continue to
experience severe hardship. 

## 3. Methodology

An ethnographic methodology is required to compare and contrast the histories
and present status of Ashkenazi Jews and Romanies, both in their historical
experience in Eastern Europe and in their more recent diasporas. Four
sub-questions guide the project. (1) In what ways are the earliest origins of
both peoples in Europe similar and different? (2) In what ways have internal
factors (such as Ashkenazi and Romani culture) and external factors (such as
outside policies towards Jews and Romanies) contributed to both groups
maintaining a distinct cultural identity? (3) How have European cultures and
governments responded to the presence of Ashkenazi and Romani people in Eastern
Europe? (4) What differences in the history of the two groups have contributed
to the very different situations of Ashkenazim and Romanies in the modern
world?

This project is ethnographic and historical in nature. Because the historical
experiences of ethnic groups are not subject to the sorts of experimental
methods used in a laboratory, an extended comparison between the historical
records of two peoples, Ashkenazim and Romanies, is carried out. Though
ethnography is qualitative in nature, this project makes use of genetic and
statistical data, when it is available, to measure relevant aspects of the
historical experiences of both groups. The research is mixed between
qualitative and quantitative approaches, with quantitative data better
available for the most recent portions of the history of both ethnic groups.

### Plan of Action

Given the qualitative nature of the project, this work is built on the
foundation of researchers who discuss the broad scope of Ashkenazi and Romani
history from the arrival of both groups in Europe until the present day. In
addition to books which provide broad overviews of the history of these
peoples, a variety of studies (especially in genetics) and more specialized
volumes have been consulted, on subjects such as the historical customs of both
groups and comparative law. The research is based on the extensive literature
cited in previous chapters, and guided by the sub-questions considered for
analysis. With any ethnographic study of this kind, an element of subjectivity
is inevitably involved, as the researcher must make determinations as to what
sorts of causal explanations are more or less plausible in light of the data.
However, this subjective element is constrained by the existence of significant
quantities of primary source documents and on genetic and statistical data. By
weighing the available evidence, at least a plausible set of answers to the
sub-questions may be found.

### Earliest Origins

(1) In what ways are the earliest origins of both peoples in Europe similar and
different? Although research into the earliest origins of Ashkenazi and Romani
people is hampered by a lack of primary source documents for the earliest
stages of their presence in Europe, the origins of both groups can be compared
in light of genetic data as well as the comparative study of linguistics and
the legal traditions of both groups. The legal traditions of Ashkenazim are
rooted in pre-Ashkenazi Jewish documents, including the previously mentioned
Bible and Talmud. While such documentation does not extend as far back for the
Romanies due to an oral tradition without a long history of literacy, examining
the case of the Kaale Romanies in Finland can be used to establish the
stability of Romani traditions. The Finnish Romanies preserved a similar way of
life to other Romani groups despite four hundred years of isolation, indicating
that many features of Romani culture observed today are stable across
centuries. In addition, genetic studies show the common origin of Romani groups
(with the possible exception of Great Britain’s Romanichals) in India, where
comparative ethnographic works indicates that the Indian populations most
closely related to modern Romanies lived an economically and socially similar
lifestyle.

### Internal and External Factors

(2) In what ways have internal factors (such as Ashkenazi and Romani culture)
and external factors (such as outside policies towards Jews and Romanies)
contributed to both groups maintaining a distinct cultural identity? Ashkenazi
and Romani culture can be studied through the use of a variety of primary and
secondary sources which have documented the distinctive characteristics of both
groups across centuries and in multiple countries. The literature on the legal
traditions of both groups provides a number of ways in which the customary
practices of both groups plausibly contributed to their continued existence as
distinct peoples despite their scattered demographic presence in Europe.
Outside policies towards both are likewise well-documented, allowing
researchers to come to an understanding of the impacts of policies such as
expulsions and discriminatory regulations on both groups. In seeking to
evaluate possible explanations for the continued existence of both distinct
cultures, special attention is given to factors shared by both cultures, as
these factors may be more likely to explain similarities in the outcomes of
both cultures.

### Governmental and Cultural Responses

(3) How have European cultures and governments responded to the presence of
Ashkenazi and Romani people in Eastern Europe? Just as the legal and historical
material mentioned above can be useful in explaining the continued existence of
both groups as distinct cultures, the same sources of information are useful in
describing the ways in which outsiders have responded to the presence of these
ethnic groups. This sub-question includes not only legal documents documenting
governmental behavior, but also sources which illustrate the attitudes and
stereotypes about Jews and Romanies that have been common in the surrounding
culture. Comparing the information gathered in these first three sub-questions
produces a substantial knowledge base of information useful in answering the
several facets of the fourth sub-question, addressed next.

### Results in the Modern World

(4) What differences in the history of the two groups have contributed to the
very different situations of Ashkenazim and Romani in the modern world?
Providing plausible answers to this questions requires drawing on the broad set
of resources used in answering the previous questions discussed above. In
addition to the historical work mentioned above, this section relies on
statistical work and ethnographic reports that have documented the present
social and economic status of Ashkenazim and Romanies in the United States and
Europe. Where the results of these statistical studies and ethnographic reports
regarding the more recent status of Ashkenazi and Romani populations can be
plausibly correlated with the historical factors identified through the
research on the previous three sub-questions, this study will then attempt to
examine those possible causes, weighing their significance, and provide, as far
as possible, a reasonable explanation for how Romanies and Ashkenazim have come
to their present positions in the contemporary world.

### Conclusion

As outlined above, the comparison of Ashkenazi and Romani history contains a
significant subjective element of personal judgment, but is grounded in several
overlapping kinds of data: ethnographic, historical, legal, and statistical. To
the extent that it is possible, the use of objective data mitigates the
pitfalls inherent in the subjective judgment that is an inevitable part of
historical reasoning. This multi-disciplinary approach gives the best possible
chance of coming to well-founded conclusions in this complex and sometimes
contested field. Drawing on the extensive previous literature on Ashkenazim,
and the emerging field of Romani Studies, this study attempts to explain the
present in an informed historical manner.

## 4. Results

This overall project of comparing and contrasting Ashkenazi and Romani history
is guided by four questions. (1) In what ways are the earliest origins of both
peoples in Europe similar and different? (2) In what ways have internal factors
(such as Ashkenazi and Romani culture) and external factors (such as outside
policies towards Jews and Romani) contributed to both groups maintaining a
distinct cultural identity? (3) How have European cultures and governments
responded to the presence of Ashkenazi and Romani people in Eastern Europe? (4)
What differences in the history of the two groups have contributed to the very
different situations of Ashkenazim and Romanies in the modern world?

Although these four questions provide a rough framework around which data can
be organized, their scope is interconnected, and much of the data that has been
collected can help to provide answers to more than one of the sub-questions.
For example, factors in the earliest origins of the two groups (question 1)
might shed light on the present status of the groups (4). Likewise,
governmental and cultural responses by Europeans to minority cultures (3),
could have some bearing on how these cultures maintained their distinct
cultural identities (2). The complex interconnections innate in historical
processes render it impossible to neatly divide historical investigations into
distinct categories. To avoid redundancy, data which sheds light on more than
one question is generally organized under a single subheading below. The
analysis, in chapter 5, freely uses data categorized under any of the four
sub-headings in order to shed light on any questions for which it is useful.

### Earliest Origins

(1) In what ways are the earliest origins of both peoples in Europe similar and
different?

While records concerning Ashkenazim and Romanies both appear in Europe in the
early second millennium C.E., the Ashkenazim emerged as a subset of the Jewish
population, whose earliest presence was recorded over one thousand years
earlier, extending as far back as the Bible and Hellenistic writers (Gruens,
2002). While the Ashkenazi community has no surviving records of their original
migration to Eastern Europe (Clark, 2014, p. 236), genetic evidence allows
researchers to definitively trace their ancestry. This evidence indicates that
after their separation from the broader Jewish population, the Ashkenazi
population maintained a high degree of ethnic separation, with only 5-8% of
paternal DNA in Ashkenazi males indicating non-Jewish European ancestry (Clark,
2014, p. 237). Their population arrived in the Rhineland, along the
German-French border, by the twelfth century (Costa et al., 2013), and as their
numbers grew they began a continual process of eastward expansion, with large
numbers eventually living in Poland-Lithuania (Bartal, 2005, p. 15). 

Though their history is lacking in the extensive tradition of literature common
to the Jewish people, genetic and linguistic evidence has been used to
reconstruct the earliest history of the Romani people, although some details
remain contested. Yaron Matras, the editor of the journal _Romani Studies_,
derives the name _Rom(a)_ from _Dom_, the name of a caste in India who were
forbidden to own land and who frequently lived in a migratory manner, moving in
search of employment in an economic pattern similar to that of later Romanies
(2015, p. 18). An alternate view sees the Romanies as emerging from the
intermingling of several different Indian peoples living in Persia (Kenrick,
2004). Regardless of scholarly differences of opinion as the exact nature of
the early Romani population, modern genetics has confirmed that Romanies are
closely related to peoples ancestral to India’s contemporary Scheduled Castes,
the lowest-status groups in the traditional Hindu caste system (Rai et al.,
2012). Linguistic evidence indicates that during the pre-European migrations of
Romani people, the Romanies spent a significant amount of time in Greece
(Matras, 2015, p. 19). Their entry into Europe is variantly dated depending on
the interpretation of early documents describing Romani people, with estimates
of their earliest presence in Europe ranging from the eleventh or twelfth
century (Crowe, 2007, p. xvii), or to the thirteenth century (1991, p. 4). 

Although generally speaking Romani populations are traced to India, economic
historian Gregory Clark argues that this is not the case for the United
Kingdom’s “Gypsy or Traveller” (_Romanichal_) people (2014, p. 240). On the
basis of physical characteristics as well as an analysis of surnames found in
census data, Clark argues that this population is ethnically British, but have
adopted a mythological Romani identity on the basis of economic and social
similarities (2014, p. 240-243). In addition, Clark suggests that because of a
lack of the visible features (darker skin, facial shape) common to other Romani
groups, the “Gypsies” of England have seen large-scale turn-over as people move
from “Gypsy” to mainstream society and vice versa (2014, p. 244). There have,
however, been no genetic studies of the “Gypsy” population in the United
Kingdom to confirm or deny Clark’s interpretation (2014, p. 243).

### Internal and External Factors

(2) In what ways have internal factors (such as Ashkenazi and Romani culture)
and external factors (such as outside policies towards Jews and Romanies)
contributed to both groups maintaining a distinct cultural identity?

While maintaining an endogamous, separate identity, the Ashkenazi population
expanded into the Poland-Lithuanian Commonwealth during its existence from its
formation in 1368 (Frost, 2015, p. 50), to its dissolution in 1772, by which
point the majority of Ashkenazi Jews were living within its borders (Bartal,
2005, p. 1). 

Despite their long tenure in the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, the Ashkenazim
maintained the cultural identity they had formed in Germany, continuing to
speak Yiddish, a distinctly Jewish dialect of German (Bartal, 2005, p. 15-16).
In addition to Yiddish, Jews were conspicuously distinguished from non-Jews by
their different clothing, hair-cutting, and hair-covering practices (Katz,
1993, p. 12). In Poland-Lithuania and elsewhere in Europe, Jews were
considered, even after hundreds of years in Europe, as an ethnically and
religiously “foreign group” of guests by the surrounding Christian population,
which considered itself to be the native and indigenous population of Europe
with a stronger right to live in the land (Katz, 1993, p. 13). Despite their
exclusion from legal rights, the Polish nobility encouraged the presence of
Jews in order to provide financing and business administration (Katz, 1993, p.
15).  Jews came to function as an economically elite class, one step below the
nobility, but well above the mass of Polish peasants (Bartal, 2005, p.
159-161). By the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries, the Jewish community had
strong international ties, with travel, trade, and even charitable aid crossing
national boundaries (Katz, 1993, p. 7).

Traditional Jewish law, observed historically by both Ashkenazim and other
Jews, is referred to as _halakha_ (Katz, 1993). Historically, halakha was a
central part of the way that Jewish society “saw itself as based upon a body of
knowledge and a set of values handed down to it from the past” (Katz, 1993, p.
1). Halakha has developed through a series of works, each of which comments on
earlier works. The standard halakhic literature includes the legal material in
the Bible itself (first millennium BCE), the _Mishnah_ (c. 200 CE), the _Talmud
Bavli_ (c. 500 CE), the _Mishneh Torah_ (twelfth century CE), and the _Shulchan
Aruch_ (sixteenth century) (Carmichael, 2001, pp. 118-120). 

Chua and Rubenfeld, in their study of high-achieving minority groups in the
United States, have noted that traditional Jewish legal exegesis places a high
value on impulse control. They cite the Talmud, the Hellenistic Jewish author
Philo, and the standard Jewish legal code known as the _Shulchan Aruch_ to
illustrate ways in which traditional Jewish thought values non-impulsive,
deliberate behavior (2014, p. 138-140). 

One ongoing concern of halakha is avoiding and purifying oneself from _niddah_,
or ritual pollution (Carmichael, 2001, p. 122). Detailed Jewish laws concerning
ritual purity effectively made it impossible for Jews to share meals with
non-Jews, which created a sense of social distance (Katz, 1993, p. 20). Jewish
law also created a sense of legal distance, as halakha contains prohibitions
against turning over a Jew to non-Jewish authorities for prosecution (Berman,
2016), and even against teaching non-Jews about halakha itself (Feldman, 1993,
p. 319). 

Though following halakha is today largely a matter of choice for Orthodox Jews,
historically many its provisions were legally enforced. Due to the segregated
nature of Ashkenazi Jewish life, Jews were granted the right to administer
their own internal affairs at the municipal level, with powers so broad that
they extended even to the operation of their own communal prisons and the
collection of taxes to support their local Jewish governments (Katz, 1993, pp.
65-75). In addition to civil and criminal penalties resembling a modern legal
system, Jewish self-government has also relied upon _herem_, a decree by a
legal court that mandated that a malefactor be excommunicated religiously and
shunned by other Jews (Wright, 2012, p. 65).  Thus, while powerless in terms of
the political structure of the surrounding society, Jews formed something like
a parallel state within the state, providing self-government within a
theocratic structure (Katz, 1993, pp. 76-87). The Jewish communities also
created a range of social, charitable, and guild institutions, known as
_havurot_ (Katz, 1993, pp. 132-140). 

The social life of Romani people has historically been based on kinship ties
between families (Matras, 2015, p. 27). In the case of the Vlach Rom, the
largest Romani population, the kinship structure is very elaborate. Each Romani
person belongs to a _familia_, a unit somewhat larger than the nuclear family,
with several familia making up a _vitsa_, several vitsa making up a _natsiya_,
and four natsiya making up the Vlach population as a whole (Friedman, 2017, p.
2). Running parallel to this hierarchical kinship system is the organization of
Vlach Romanies into _kumpania_, geographically-based groups which usually each
have a male leader known as a _Rom Baro_. A kumpania may include members of one
or more vitsa depending on the locally recognized rules which govern it
(Friedman, 2017, p. 3). Among Vlach Romanies, conflicts arising within or
between kinship groups are traditionally dealt with through a _kris_, or Romani
judicial assembly (Friedman, 2017, p. 4). The decisions of a kris are enforced
through a variety of legal and extra-legal means, prominently including
shunning of offenders — a kris can legally declare an offender to be ritually
polluted, leading to a ostracism (Friedman, 2017, p. 6). 

Historically, Romanies have not had any awareness of being a single group
coming from a single place, and the various Romani groups have not had any
shared religion or scripture (Matras, 2015, p. 30). Due to the traditional
illiteracy of the Romani people, memories of historical events more than one or
two generations in the past have tended to fade (Matras, 2015, p. 42). However,
while historical memory has not been accurately preserved in Romani society,
Romani customary law has been passed down orally, primarily by women, through
the centuries (Weyrauch, 2001, p. 3). 

The totality of customs and practices that make up the traditional Romani way
of life are known as _romanipen_. Like the halakha, romanipen is concerned with
the maintenance of ritual purity, which is safeguarded through a variety of
rules concerning cleanliness, clothing, food preparation, and contact with
non-Romani peoples, or _gadjes_ (Hancock, 1991, p. 5). 

The concern about ritual purity dates back to India (Hancock, 1991, p. 5), and
the state of defilement or pollution which the Romani attempt to avoid is known
as _marimé_ (Carmichael, 2001, p. 122). Because non-Romanies do not follow
Romani purity laws, it is a matter of principle for traditional Romanies to
avoid physical contact with non-Romanies, who are believed to transmit marimé
by touch. Hancock believes that this avoidance behavior has likely contributed
to anti-Romani hostility (1991, p. 6). In addition, detailed purity regulations
pertaining to food have historically prevented Romani people from sharing meals
with non-Romanies (Matras, 2015, pp. 87-90). The fear of contamination by
non-Romani people has been so strong that upon moving into rental properties
Romanies have even been known to replace toilets and sinks (Weyrauch, 2001, p.
4). David D. Friedman, an economist and legal scholar, describes these purity
laws as “Orthodox Judaism on steroids,” and provides an account of how the fear
of cross-contamination leads traditional Romanies to use six different tubs for
washing: one each for “men’s lower garments, men’s upper garments, women’s
lower garments, men’s upper garments, children’s garments, and eating utensils”
(2017, p. 4). 

Maintenance of ritual purity has been especially difficult in cases of Romanies
coming in contact with the legal system. Physical contact with dogs and cats
creates defilement, as does nakedness, so being searched by police dogs or
strip-searched is a serious matter for Romanies. In addition, the food purity
laws cause Romanies to starve in prison rather than risk acquiring pollution
from the non-Romani kitchen staff (Weyrauch, 2001, pp. 6-7). Needless to say,
sex and marriage with non-Romanies is forbidden under these laws (Carmichael,
2001, p. 121). 

In addition to purity laws, the other major category of Romani law consists of
“the obligations of Romani to each other, including extensive obligations of
mutual help, especially but not exclusively between relatives” (Friedman, 2017,
p. 3). These mutual obligations include assistance for impoverished relatives
and collective fund-raising for medical care, religious feasts, and funerals
(Friedman, 2017, p. 3). 

Unlike halakha, romanipen has historically been a “strictly oral” phenomenon,
as the Romani people until recently have had no written documents (Matras,
2015, p. 39). However, similar to halakha, it was traditionally kept
“absolutely” secret from non-Romani, although there has more recently been some
opening up, and publications on Romani law are beginning to appear (Harris,
2001, pp. ix-x). While it is possible to speak generally about Romani law,
generalizations about Romani law will almost never apply universally, because
these traditions have been passed down orally among scattered communities
throughout the entire history of Romanies (Weyrauch, 2001, p. 2). However,
evidence for the more or less accurate preservation of the broad contours of
Romani law can be found, for example, among the Kaale Gypsies of Finland, whose
version of Romani law is similar to that of other communities despite four
hundred years of isolation (Weyrauch, 2001, p. 3). While the Kaale do have
distinct practices with regard to rearing children and marriage, these
differences are an extension of the concerns about sexual defilement that are
found among other Romanies (Friedman, 2017, p. 7-8). 

Unlike Jews, Romanies have not maintained a clergy or organized religion of
their own, although Romanies do tend to hold to a set of generally accepted
beliefs combining Christian and Hindu ideas (Hancock, 2002, pp. 74-75).
According to historian Yaron Matras, Romanies have usually become members of
the local religion, whether Christian or Muslim, but have maintained their own
beliefs and relied on local religion primarily to provide funeral services
(Matras, 2015, p. 118).

### Governmental and Cultural Responses

(3) How have European cultures and governments responded to the presence of
Ashkenazi and Romani people in Eastern Europe?

While Jewish communities were internationally connected, locally they were
segregated, legally restricted to particular quarters of towns (sometimes
referred to as “ghettoes”), creating a situation in which almost the entire
Ashkenazi population lived in neighborhoods solely populated by other
Ashkenazim (Katz, 1993, p. 11). Legally, Ashkenazi Jews were not considered to
have any legal right to reside anywhere in Europe, but were generally tolerated
at the discretion of local rulers, not possessing the land tenure rights that
extended even to the Christian peasant underclass (Katz, 1993, p. 13). As a
result, European rulers considered themselves legally entitled to expel Jews at
will (Katz, 1993, pp. 14-16). 

Despite the precarious legal status of Jews in Europe, the Polish land-owning
nobility which ruled Poland-Lithuania utilized the talents of Ashkenazim as
they founded new towns in previously rural areas by renting land to Jews, who
then managed a wide variety of agricultural and other economic enterprises
(Bartal, 2005, p. 18). Poland-Lithuania’s Jews were granted wide autonomy in
tax-collection, so that the nobility simply levied a single collective tax on
the Jews of each area, giving the Jewish community wide discretion in
collecting the tax from individuals (Bartal, 2005, p. 21). Jews came to
dominate trade and finance in Eastern and central Europe both in
Poland-Lithuania and in Germany. As a result, it became a popular stereotype
that skill in business was a “uniquely Jewish characteristic” (Katz, 1993, p.
45). Because they did not own rural land, and because they did not have a
recognized right to inhabit any part of Europe, they were politically powerless
in a way that made them non-threatening to rulers. Paradoxically, this made
rulers feel safe in entrusting economic responsibility to Jewish hands,
contributing to Jewish economic success (Katz, 1993, p. 46). 

Like Jews, Romani people have been subject to repeated expulsions by hostile
European governments (Hancok, 1991, p. 5). While governmental coercion was
applied to force settled Romanies to move out of areas, the opposite has
occurred as well. Especially as the world has economically modernized, many
governments have attempted to force traditionally nomadic Romanies to settle,
but so far these efforts have been generally unsuccessful (Crowe, 2007, pp.
xviii-xiv, 295). 

Because of their practice of formally joining the predominant local religion
but maintaining their traditional beliefs and practices, outsiders have
frequently viewed Romani religious adherence to Christianity as lacking in
genuineness (Matras, 2015, p. 118). Romani activist Ruth Barnett has called the
idea of Romani irreligion “the most pernicious myth about gypsies” in a recent
work devoted to undermining stereotypes, and insists, in contrasts to the
claims of Hancock and Matras, that most Romanies do in fact attend local
congregations and adhere strongly to the religions to which they are formally
affiliated (2013, p. 44). These stereotypes historically have had contradictory
effects on relations with Romanies: on the one hand Christian rulers repeatedly
ordered forced conversion of Romanies on the theory that they needed religion;
on the other, Romanies were often barred from participation in religious
rituals on the theory that they were too inherently heathen to be permitted
access to the church (Fraser, 1999, pp. 184-185).

### Status in the Modern World

(4) What differences in the history of the two groups have contributed to the
very different situations of Ashkenazim and Romani in the modern world? 

One indicator of the very different statuses of Ashkenazi and Romani people in
the modern world lies in the different level of attention they receive
academically. While academic departments of Jewish Studies can be found in
great numbers, the field of Romani Studies is still emerging. As of 1991,
Romani scholar Ian Hancock claimed that works on Romani “social issues . . .
may be counted on the fingers of one hand” (p. 3). More recently there has been
a significant uptick in scholarly interest in the Romani, but the field is
still small and fragmented (Matras, 2015, pp. 34-35). This disparity in modern
attention _to_ Ashkenazim and Jews is matched by a similarly wide disparity in
the historical production of literature _by_ Ashkenazim and Romanies. Jewish
literature has been prolific and continuously produced for over two thousand
years, including, in chronological order, the Tanakh (known as the Old
Testament or most of the Old Testament by various Christian groups), the
Mishnah, the Talmud, the famous medieval commentaries by Rashi and Maimonides,
the Shulchan Aruch, and the voluminous _responsa_ literature produced by rabbis
from the middle ages to the present day. Meanwhile, significant literary output
by Romanies has only occurred since the 1920’s (Cederberg, 2006, p. 121-122).

The differences reflected in literature likewise match differences in observed
socioeconomic status, both historically and in the modern world. Throughout
their tenure in Europe, Ashkenazi Jews “are longstanding elites of a millennium
or more” (Clark, 2014, p. 10). Despite a long history of anti-Semitic
persecuation, the demographic estimates implied by the majority view of
Ashkenazi origins imply a population growth rate of over 50% each generation,
an “extraordinary” rate given the stagnant populations of medieval Europe.
These rates, implying a much higher rate of child survival than found in the
surrounding impoverished populations, are consistent with the sorts of rates
observed in highly elite subpopulations in medieval England (Clark, 2014, p.
236). 

By the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries, the Jewish diaspora was
internationally connected, with travel, trade, and even charitable aid crossing
national boundaries (Katz, 1993, p. 7). However, long before this Ashkenazi
Jews were socially and economically outliers in Europe. The unique
socioeconomic role of Ashkenazim in Europe in the medieval world is summed up
by Cochran, Hardy, and Harpending as follows: “For 800-900 years, from roughly
AD 800 to AD 1650 or 1700, the great majority of the Ashkenazi Jews had
managerial and financial jobs, jobs of high complexity, and were neither
farmers nor craftsmen. In this they differed from all other settled peoples of
which we have knowledge” (2006, p. 670). 

Due to the killings and emigration occurring as a result of the holocaust, the
majority of Ashkenazim today live in the United States or Israel (Tapper, 2016,
p. 20). The socioeconomic status and achievements in both countries tend to
follow the same lines observed in earlier history. The average net worth of
American Jews was 443,000 as of 2004, compared to 99,500 in the general
population (Chua & Rubenfeld, 2014, p. 7). Income of American Jewish households
averaged approximately $98,00 per year as of 2010, “almost twice the national
median” (Chua and Rubenfeld, 2014, p. 43). In the United States, studies of
Ashkenazi surnames have been used to estimate that Ashkenazi Jews are
overrepresented as physicians by a factor of six (Clark, 2014, p. 47). As of
1960, the average Sephardi (non-Ashkenazi) Jewish family in Israel had a
household income of only 48% of the Ashkenazi average, a gap which has declined
somewhat but is still noticeable today (Rattner & Fishman, 1998, p. 5).
Globally, Jews are overrepresented among Nobel Prize winners by a factor of one
hundred, comprising approximately 0.2% of people worldwide but collecting about
20% of Nobel Prizes (Chua & Rubenfeld, 2014, p. 54). 

Although strict endogamy was the norm historically, in modern America rates of
marriage to non-Jews have risen sharply since around 1970, and as of the end of
the twentieth century nearly half of Jewish marriages were to non-Jews (Clark,
2014, p. 283). In Israel as well, intermarriage between Ashkenazi and Sephardi
Jews has been increasing (Goldberg, 1996, p. 40). 

The historical experience of the Romanies has been a very different matter.
Since the late fourteenth century, observers have noted that Romani people have
tended not to have regular employment (Matras, 2015, p. 8). On the other hand,
Romani people traditionally have had skills in metallurgy and other
economically valuable crafts, as a result of which they were widely enslaved
(Matras, 2015, pp. 160-163). In the fourteenth century, Romani slaves were
being imported into what is now Romania (Matras, 2015, p. 23). Romanian
Romanies were kept in slavery until its abolition in the mid-nineteenth century
(Crowe, 2007, p. xviii). 

In some cases, however, Romanies were given a degree of autonomy. The earliest
(fifteenth century) records of Romanies in Western Europe, for example,
“describe them as traveling through Europe bearing letters of safe conduct from
[Holy Roman Emperor] Sigismund giving them judicial autonomy, the right to be
punished only by their own authorities” (Friedman, 2017, p. 1). Likewise, in
the late eighteenth century, Michael Sutsu, a Moldavian prince, ordered that
Romanies were to judge their own conflicts, “and the governors and other
dignitaries are not to interfere unless there is a death case” (as cited in
Friedman, 2017, p. 10). The grants of judicial autonomy were similar to the
status of European Jews in pre-modern Europe (Friedman, 2017, p. 1). Even in
the case of what Matras and Crowe describe as “slavery” in Romania, and what
Friedman describes as “enserfment,” some degree of freedom was sometimes
achieved. Some Romanian Romanies, despite being theoretically serfs tied to the
land with an owner, instead lived by an arrangement in which they roamed freely
but paid annual feudal “dues” to their master in exchange for the right to
mobility (Friedman, 2017, p. 10). 

Stereotypically, “Gypsies” are associated with a nomadic lifestyle. While this
is in fact not an accurate description as most Romani have historically lived
in permanent settlements (Matras, 2015, p. 41), it does have an element of
truth, as a result of the possible _Dom_ heritage and the repeated expulsions
which forced Romanies to adjust to life on the move (Hancock, 1991, p. 5). In
addition to being a survival tactic, nomadism for many Romani has been a valued
traditional lifestyle (Crowe, 2007, p. 294). As previously mentioned, the
English “Gypsies” are of contested origin, and may not be biologically
connected to the Romani population. However, their economic status has been
similar, and they “have been at the bottom of the economic scale for more than
four hundred years” (Clark, 2014, p. 10). 

The beginnings of Romani literacy saw a first flowering of Romani literature in
the Soviet Union in the 1920’s and 30’s (Crowe, 2007, p. xx). The Soviet Union
began a widespread push to integrate Romani people into modern settled life,
and to put an end to nomadism. This effort failed. One Romani interviewed by a
Soviet researcher, invoking stereotypes about both Jews and his own people, is
on record as stating, “We are not trained to till the land, and we are not as
clever as Jews; we cannot change so easily” (Crowe, 2007, p. 175). Like Jews,
Romani people were targeted during the holocaust, and large numbers were killed
(Mayall, 2004, p. 235). However, a noteworthy difference is that while Nazi
Germany managed the systematic extermination of six million Jews, a smaller
proportion of Romanies were killed. Friedman raises the possibility that the
relative success of Roma in evading genocide may be due to the traditional
Romani practice of avoiding registration with governments, or of providing
false names when recorded contact with governments is unavoidable, making it
very difficult for a central government to systematically hunt for Romanies
(2017, pp. 11-12). 

Since then, Romanies throughout Europe have continued to live in “appallingly
low social, economic, and educational status” (Crowe, 2007, p. xxi), and have
continued to live in tension with law enforcement (Taylor, 2014, pp. 187-234).
Although some Romanies have begun to organize politically since the 1970’s
(Matras, 2015, p. 31), conditions are still daunting. In recent decades,
estimates for Eastern Europe place Romani adult unemployment rates around 80%
(Taylor, 2014, p. 222). Hancock has noted that life expectancies for Romanies
are lower than for their surrounding societies: 15 years lower in Hungary, and
an average lifespan between 48 and 55 years in the United States (1999, p. 7).
Similarly, Gregory Clark relates that the United Kingdom’s “Gypsy” community
has infant mortality rates roughly 20 times those of the surrounding
population, and their lives are on average ten years shorter (p. 240). Romanies
still tend to avoid modern medical care due to a fear of contracting ritual
impurity in the hospital environment (Hancock, 2002, p. 88). Although
statistics concerning Romanies are difficult to verify because of difficulties
involved in gathering data on a poorly understood population, the literature on
Romanies is consistent in the picture portrayed, of a population severely
marginalized in economic, educational, and social terms. The population itself
is so poorly measured that estimates of the number of Romanies worldwide range
from 3 to 15 million (Friedman, 2017, p. 1).

They continue to be associated with nomadism in the popular imagination, but
about 80% of Romanies in Europe live in permanent settlements (Matras 2015, p.
25), and less than 3% of American Romanies live in mobile homes (Hancock, 2002,
p. 107). In Europe, among Romanies who continue to live nomadically or in
caravans, many can only maintain their traditional lifestyles by breaking
Europe’s land use laws, resulting in evictions and conflict with police
(Taylor, 2014, pp. 187-234). In 2011, a controversial incident resulted in
eighty families being evicted from their own (legally owned) land in England
due to failure to complete required government paperwork (Taylor, 2014, p.
227). 

In the United Kingdom fully one-third of Romani adults have never attended
school at all, and of those with some schooling the average student dropped out
at thirteen years of age (Clark, 2014, p. 240). Yaron Matras reports contact
with a Romani community in England of which no adult member was literate (2015,
p. 13). Similarly, Becky Taylor reports, in an interview with a Romanichal man
who left school at age seven, that he saw no need for reading because not a
single person he knew was literate (Taylor, 2014, p. 215). In Bulgaria, a
successful 1980’s reorganization of schools to provide vocational training
resulted in the number of students  continuing education after primary school
_rising_ to 25-30%, with similar figures reported in other parts of Eastern
Europe (Taylor, 2014, p. 216). In Hamburg, Germany, a survey of Romani people
in the early 1980’s failed to find a single high school graduate (Taylor, 2014,
p. 215). While intermarriage between Ashkenazim and other Jews or non-Jews has
become commonplace, social acceptance for Romanies has been slower to develop,
with majorities in some countries as high as 85% having unfavorable views of
Roma (“EU image,” p. 5). On average only 19% of Europeans surveyed by Pew
Research say they would be willing to “accept” Romanies “as family members”
(“Religious Belief,” 2017).

Despite great challenges, many Romanies have clung successfully to significant
portions of their traditional culture. Even in the United States, some continue
speaking Romani “four or five generations” after their ancestors immigrated
(Matras, 2015, p. 3). 

## 5. Summary and Discussion

This project has focused on comparing and contrasting the history of two
minority groups who have maintained cultural distinction from the surrounding
cultures of Eastern Europe and elsewhere over hundreds of years: Ashkenazi Jews
and Romanies. This project sought to compare various aspects of their histories
in order to understand the historical experience of both groups and causal
factors influencing their present status.

As discussed in Chapter 2, a review of the literature on the subject found a
much larger quantity of literature devoted to Jewish (mostly Ashkenazi Jewish)
history than to that of Romanies, as Romani Studies is a still-emerging
academic field (Hancock, 1991, p. 3; Matras, 2015, pp. 34-35). A long and
voluminous history of Jewish literature goes back over 2000 years, while
literature about Romanies appears first in the late middle ages (Crowe, 2007,
p. xvii) and literature by Romanies in the early Soviet Union (Cederberg, 2006,
pp. 121-22). Genetic studies connect Ashkenazis to other Jewish groups and
indicate a long tradition of avoiding intermarriage with non-Jews (Clark, 2014,
p. 237) since their arrival in Europe in the twelfth century or earlier (Costa
et al., 2013) and throughout their expansion eastward into Poland-Lithuania
(Bartal, 2005, p. 15). 

Romanies, in general, originate in India, as confirmed by linguistic (Matras,
2015, p. 19) and genetic evidence (Rai et al., 2012). The exact details of
their earliest origins after leaving India and prior to entering Europe are the
subject of some disagreement (Kenrick, 2004; Matras, 2015, p. 18), but both
linguistic and genetic evidence places their ancestry low in the socio-economic
caste hierarchy of India (Matras 2015, p. 18; Rai et al., 2012). Depending on
the interpretation of primary source documents, their arrival in Europe may be
placed anywhere from the eleventh to thirteenth centuries (Crowe, 2007, p.
xvii; Hancock, 1991, p. 4). It remains a matter of dispute whether the United
Kingdom’s Romanichal or “Gypsy” population is related genetically to other
Romanies (Clark, 2014, pp. 240-244). 

Once in Europe, demographic evidence indicates an “extraordinary” long-term and
widespread pattern of Ashkenazi economic success (Clark, 2014, p.10, 236),
despite a long history of persecution and discriminatory laws. By the early
modern period, the Jewish community had a high degree of international
organization, although they were confined to ghettos in Europe and
distinguished culturally from non-Jews (Katz, 1993, pp. 7-12). Legally, Jews
were discriminated against with respect to land rights and sometimes expelled
(Katz, 1993, pp. 13-16), but they were also given managerial roles within the
Polish-Lithuanian commonwealth and given ethnic privileges with respect to
self-governance and tax collection (Bartal, 2005, p. 17-18; Katz, 1993, p. 15)
and eventually achieved a dominant position in trade and finance (Katz, 1993,
p. 45). Their long-standing pattern of doing white-collar work differs from
that of all other premodern peoples (Cochran, Hardy, & Harpending, 2006, p.
670). 

Romanies, on the other hand, have occupied a marginal economic position in
Europe since at least the fourteenth century (Matras, 2015, p. 8) and when they
did have economically valued skills, this lead to their enslavement (Crowe,
2007, p. xviii; Matras, 2015, pp. 23, 160-163). Although the stereotype is not
reliable for all or even most Romanies, there is a long-standing association of
Romanies with nomadic living, sometimes imposed by official expulsions and
sometimes as a preferred lifestyle (Crowe, 2007, pp. xviii-xix, 294-5; Hancock,
1991, p. 5; Matras, 2015, p. 41). Romani society has been organized on a
kinship basis (Matras, 2015, p. 27), without any international organization
(Matras, 2015, p. 30). Traditionally Romanies have been illiterate, without
awareness of a shared Romani history or religion but with a traditional set of
laws passed down orally (Matras, 2015, p. 30, 42; Weyrauch, 2001, p. 3). Like
Romanies, the British Romanichals have historically had a marginal
socio-economic status (Clark, 2014, p. 10). 

As discussed in more detail in Chapter 2, a long history of written Jewish law,
or _halakha_, exists and has grown over the centuries (Carmichael, 2001, pp.
118-120; Katz, 1993). The halakha has created a sense of social distance
through purity laws (Carmichael, 2001, p. 122), making it nearly impossible to
share meals with non-Jews (Katz, 1993, p. 20) and mandating at times
non-cooperation with non-Jewish governments and secrecy about Jewish
self-governance (Berman, 2016; Feldman, 1993, p. 319). The non-Jewish
governments historically granted Jewish authorities wide autonomy in enforcing
halakha upon Jews and establishing their own parallel legal, taxing, and social
institutions (Katz, 1993, pp. 65-87, 132-140). 

The Romani analogue to halakha is _romanipen_, with a parallel set of codes
enforcing separation through purity laws which affect meal preparation and
social and physical contact with non-Romanies (Carmichael, 2001, pp. 121-122;
Hancock, 1991, p. 5; Matras, 2015, pp. 87-90; Weyrauch, 2001, pp. 4-7). Just as
halakha, the romanipen has historically mandated secrecy (Harris, 2001, pp.
ix-x). While Romanies have not maintained their own religious institutions,
they do have widely held beliefs with some roots in Christianity and Hinduism
(Hancock, 2002, pp. 74-75) and have had a complicated relationship with local
religious authorities (Barnett, 2013, p. 44; Matras, 2015, p. 118).
Non-Romanies have sometimes tried to force Romanies to become more involved in
their religions, and sometimes have barred Romanies from religious
participation (Fraser, 1999, pp. 184-185). 

In the modern world, Ashkenazim have been notable for unusually high incomes
and net worth (Chua  & Rubenfeld, 2014, pp. 7, 43; Rattner & Fishman, 1998, p.
5) and unusually high representation in high-status professions and awards
(Clark, 2014, p. 47; Chua & Robenfeld, p. 54). Statistical studies point to
increasing assimilation, with increasing marriage rates between Ashkenazim and
both non-Ashkenazi Jews (Goldberg, 1996, p. 40) and non-Jews (Clark, 2014, p.
283). Anti-semitism has continued to be a challenge, with the most extreme
example, of course, being the holocaust, which lead most Ashkenazim who
survived to leave Europe for the United States or Israel (Tapper, 2016, p. 20). 

Although Romani literacy and literature have emerged to some degree since the
1920’s (Crowe, 2007, p. xx), attempts to integrate Romanies into modern
societies have often failed (Crowe, 2007, p. 175). Like Jews, large numbers of
Romanies were killed in the holocaust (Mayall, 2004, p. 235). Ever since,
Romanies have continued to live at the very bottom of the socioeconomic ladder
(Crowe, 2007, p. xxi) and in tension with law enforcement (Taylor, 2014, pp.
187-234). Despite some political organization since the 1970’s (Matras, 2015,
p. 31), unemployment (Taylor, 2014, p. 222), low life expectancies and high
mortality rates (Hancock, 1999, p. 7; Clark, 2014, p. 240), avoidance of modern
medicine (Hancock, 2002, p. 88), illiteracy and high educational drop-out rates
(Clark, 2014, p. 240; Matras, 2015, p. 13; Taylor, 2014, p. 215-6) continue to
plague Romanies. 

### Statement of Problem

This project seeks to compare and contrast the histories of two minorities in
Europe, both living primarily in Eastern Europe and what is now Russia, during
the period from approximately 1000 CE to the present. From their arrival in
Europe around 1000 CE, both groups begin a complex history of development and
often tense relationships with the surrounding population. By examining the
commonalities and distinctions between these two ethnic groups, this project
aims to shed light on the historical development of both. The broader question
to be addressed is, “How does the history of Ashkenazi Judaism, from roughly
1000 CE to the present, primarily in Eastern Europe and what is now Russia,
compare to the history of the Romanies (commonly referred to as “Gypsies”) in
the same area and period?” This broader question is addressed by means of a
series of more narrowly focused sub-questions:

1. In what ways are the earliest origins of both peoples in Europe similar and
   different?
2. In what ways have internal factors (such as Ashkenazi and Romani culture)
   and external factors (such as outside policies towards Jews and Romanies)
contributed to both groups maintaining a distinct cultural identity?
3. How have European cultures and governments responded to the presence of
   Ashkenazi and Romani people in Eastern Europe?
4. What differences in the history of the two groups have contributed to the
   very different situations of Ashkenazim and Romanies in the modern world?

### Review of Methodology

As discussed in Chapter 3, the methodology required for this project is
fundamentally an ethnographic and historical one. It is qualitative in nature,
but also makes use of genetic and statistical data in order to measure relevant
aspects of the history of both groups. Thus this project relies on a mixture of
qualitative and quantitative approaches, with the amount of quantitative data
rising later in the history of both groups as modern states and
non-governmental organizations begin to keep more extensive statistical
records. Because the subject is extremely broad, the project relies in part on
books which provide broad overviews of both groups, along with more specialized
books and journal articles which focus on narrower problems germane to this
project. In any project of this kind, some degree of subjectivity is
unfortunately inevitable, but the use of subjective assessment is constrained
by the quantitative and historical data available. 

For sub-question (1), the earliest histories of both groups are reconstructed
through the use of genetic data and the extensive primary sources produced by
Ashkenazim, although such written records are not available for most of Romani
history. While Romani documentation is often lacking, the substantially similar
oral traditions of Finnish Kaale Romanies despite centuries of isolation
provide a strong argument for the historical maintenance of Romani culture. For
sub-question (2), the traditions of both groups provide relevant information,
and outside policies are well-documented by medieval and modern governments.
Sub-question (3) is answered by examination of the records about both groups
produced by outsiders, which document the ways that outside governments and
cultures have responded to Ashkenazi and Romani people. For sub-question (4),
the greatest quantity of material is available, as the modern world has taken a
greater interest in statistically and legally documenting matters related to
minority groups. Universities have also taken a historically strong interest in
Jewish matters, while Romani Studies has been emerging over the past few
decades.

### Summary of Results

The various sorts of data collected, most fully described in Chapters 2 and 4,
paint a picture of two cultures whose modern situation is related to
long-persistent cultural characteristics not only observable over nearly one
thousand years in Eastern Europe, but which are also visible in the present day
in the diasporas of both groups, and which are even to a significant degree
visible in the pre-European history of the ancestors of both groups. The
tenaciousness of millennia-old cultural distinctions is surprising, and adds a
helpful corrective to any attempts to understand Jewish and Romani cultures
through observations that might merely include their recent history and
interactions with other groups. 

Also surprising is the degree to which the maintenance of cultural barriers has
been a “shared project” in a sense, between each group and the outside culture.
While outside cultures have been often unfriendly to both, sometimes to the
extent of enslavement and mass murder, there has been in a certain sense of the
word “cooperation” in more ordinary times, in that both inside and outside the
groups people have made efforts that contribute to the maintenance of these
cultural distinctions. Both groups show a long-held desire not to mingle with
the broader European world, and the broader European world has enthusiastically
reciprocated the sentiment. In a strictly economic and academic sense,
Ashkenazim and Romanies might be looked on generally as “opposites” in that
while Ashkenazim show a very surprising level of high performance in the modern
world, and Romanies show a surprisingly low level of success by conventional
economic and academic measures. 

However, in cultural terms the similarities between the groups are just as
surprising. Both groups have used a variety of tactics to separate themselves
from an often hostile world which has historically had very different values
from their own, and have demonstrated a strong desire to maintain their way of
life and to be governed in terms of their own traditions. Negotiating legal
autonomy, avoiding the European governmental court systems, maintaining strict
purity codes, and limiting the flow of information to outsiders mark both
groups. Romanies show every sign of maintaining their traditional way of life
even at a high price, and Orthodox Ashkenazim continue to do the same, even
after both groups were targeted for their differences in the holocaust and over
centuries.

#### Earliest Origins

In what ways are the earliest origins of both peoples in Europe similar and
different? 

To begin with similarities, both groups are originally composed of immigrants
to Eastern Europe, as evidenced by both language and genes. Ashkenazim genes
indicate origins in the preexisting Jewish population (Clark, 2014, p. 237),
while Romanies genes are traced to India (Rai et al., 2012). In both cases, the
very earliest presence of both groups in Eastern Europe is poorly documented
(Clark, 2014, p. 236; compare also the estimates of when Romanies arrived in
Crowe, 2007, p. xvii and Hancock, 1991, p. 4). 

However, an important difference between the two lies in literacy. Ashkenazim
were heirs to a tradition of literacy extending back to the earliest parts of
the Bible, parts of which are variously dated to as late as the fourth century
BCE (Schniedewind, 2005, pp. 17-18), or to as early as the twelfth century
(Bellinzoni, 2009, p. 108). It is beyond the scope of this project to wade into
the difficult debate of dating the earliest biblical texts. Suffice it to say
for our purposes that an Ashkenazi Jew as early as the twelfth century CE would
enjoy a tradition of literacy extending back at least fourteen centuries years
and possibly as many as twenty-three. The biblical literature, like the Jewish
literature following it, records the maintenance of Jewish law (e.g.
Deuteronomy) and the politics of surviving as a minority group and seeking
self-governance within a larger and sometimes hostile empire (e.g. Esther,
Jeremiah, Ezra, and Nehemiah). The practice of avoiding direct confrontation
with non-Jewish authorities while seeking to produce a parallel set of
governmental institutions becomes vital to the project of Ashkenazi survival,
as discussed in Chapters 2 and 4 and further discussed below.

Meanwhile, Romani culture was in the beginning illiterate, a condition which
lasted until the first significant literary output in the 1920’s and resulted
in Romanies not having any detailed historical memory of their origins or sense
of cultural unity (Matras, 2015, p. 42) and passing down their traditional law
orally (Weyrauch, 2001, p. 3). The effects of this important difference will be
further discussed below.

#### Persistance of Cultural Identity

In what ways have internal factors (such as Ashkenazi and Romani culture) and
external factors (such as outside policies towards Jews and Romanies)
contributed to both groups maintaining a distinct cultural identity?
 
Internally, a number of similarities have been noted between Ashkenazi and
Romani cultures. Though Ashkenazim and Romanies have not necessarily always
thought of their traditional laws in these terms, it can be argued that some of
their traditions effectively function as tactics for maintaining cultural
difference and distance. Meanwhile, there are also noteworthy parallels in the
ways that outsiders have treated Ashkenazim and Romanies, which may be thought
of in some cases as virtual “cooperation” with Ashkenazi and Romani desires to
maintain their distinctive cultures, or in other cases as hostile attempts to
prevent Ashkenazim or Romanies from “corrupting” the outside populations. 

To begin with internal factors, both cultures have maintained a linguistic
distinction with the outside world, Ashkenazim by speaking Yiddish (Bartal,
2005, pp. 15-16) and Romanies by speaking various Romani dialects (Matras,
2015, pp. 125-156). Both groups practiced elaborate purity codes which limited
the amount of legal contact with outsiders. For Jews, the ritual impurity to be
avoided is called _niddah_ and for Romanies _marimé_ (Carmichael, 2001, p.
122). Because outsiders do not practice these codes, various sorts of contact,
whether any physical contact in the case of Romanies (1991, p. 6) or the
sharing of meals in the case of Jews (Katz, 1993, p. 20), became problematic.
It is also worth pausing here to notice an important distinction. A full
prohibition of touch would inhibit economic cooperation for Romanies in a way
that a mere prohibition on sharing meals would not necessarily do for Jews. It
is plausible that the difference in the severity of the two legal codes may
have contributed to why Ashkenazi Jews got along very successfully both in the
Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth and later, while Romanies have been more or less
permanently in poverty. 

In comparing the levels of severity more generally between Jewish and Romani
law, economic historian David Friedman describes the Romani system as “Orthodox
Judaism on steroids,” a memorable phrasing which may point to the origins of
varying levels of success between the two groups. In speaking of “levels of
success,” it is important to note that “success” is always a value judgment of
some kind. For example, if one places a high value on economic factors and on
the liberties of individuals, a more severe legal code may inhibit both
economic success and personal choice, creating a “less successful” outcome. In
these senses, it is undeniable that the average modern Ashkenazi Jew is more
successful than the average Romani. On the other hand, if one places a high
value on the maintenance of tradition, and sees assimilation and intermarriage
as failures, a more severe legal code, even if it produces widespread poverty
and unemployment, may be “more successful.” It is outside the scope of this
project to prescribe to Romanies or to Ashkenazim how they should go about
balancing these competing goals. It is enough to say, as a purely descriptive
matter, that these differences may very well influence trade-offs between
continued cultural distinction and economic success.

As a confirmation of the hypothesis that varying levels of severity in a
sub-culture can lead to varying levels of economic results, consider the
example of the Amish. Amish communities vary in their strictness, and within
the various Amish groups the Schwartzentrubers, who split from other Amish in
1913, are well known for being the most resistant to compromise with the
broader American culture, avoiding even putting reflective stickers for safety
on their buggies (Kraybill, 1994, p. 55). Economically, more of the
Schwartzentrubers have low incomes than any other Amish group, a fact which
Charles E. Hurst and David L. McConnel attribute to their more numerous
technological restrictions (2010, p. 211). 

Similarly, while Jews strongly vary in level of adherence to tradition in the
modern world, even in Israel, a Jewish-dominated state, most ultra-Orthodox
(Haredi) Jews (about 60%) in Israel live in poverty, at rates even high than
the 50% of Arabs living in poverty in Israel (OECD, p 43). Recent poverty rates
in the United States as a whole are around 13% (Gabe, 2010, p. 11), but Haredi
communities have been recorded as ranging from 25 to 56% (Mendelsohn, 1999, p.
25). Just as the Haredi rates in Israel are higher than those of Israeli Arabs,
the Haredi poverty in the United States resembles or exceeds that of black
Americans, of whom about 25% live in poverty (Collins, 2015, p. 330). Therefore
there is solid statistical reason for seeing high levels of strict separation
as a possible impediment to economic success.

Another factor which both groups hold in common is endogamy, or forbidding
marriage to outsiders (Carmichael, 2001, p. 121; Dorff, 2005, p. 217). In
Judaism there is a ceremony of conversion which would allow the convert to be
considered a Jew and marry into Judaism (Kaufman, 1996, p. 44) but historically
this was rare enough for Ashkenazim that only 5-8 of paternal DNA in Ashkenazi
Jews comes from non-Jewish European sources (Clark, 2014, p. 237). This 5-8% is
cumulative over many generations, so each individual generation must have
averaged less than about 0.26% intermarriage on the male side if one estimates
30 generations of 30 years each over, say, 900 years. Different estimates for
generational length of the time of Ashkenazim in Europe will yield slightly
different results. It is unnecessary to elaborate on how forbidding marriage
might contribute to the maintenance of social distinctions. 

In legal terms, distance is created by the halakhic requirement that Jews were
not to turn over a Jew to non-Jewish authorities for prosecution (Berman,
2016), and Jews were forbidden even to teach non-Jews about Jewish law
(Feldman, 1993, p. 319). Informing to non-Jewish authorities against another
Jew was held to be a violation of a halakhic principle known as _din moser_,
and the informant, or _moser_, was subject to vigilante killing by other Jews
(Neuberger, 2009, pp. 196-197). Less severely, the use of _herem_, or shunning,
also allowed the Jewish community to exercise significant social control over
its members (Wright, 2012, p. 65). Similarly, traditional Romani concerns about
nakedness and dogs have lead Romanies to dislike being sent to prison even more
than non-Romanies do (see Weyrauch, 2001, pp. 6-7). Romanies have therefore
resorted to traditional Romani means, in some cases including a court known as
a _kris_, to avoid settling their disputes among non-Romanies (Friedman, 2017,
p. 4-6). In addition to legal powers, the kris also has the power to decree
that a person becomes ritually polluted, leading inevitably to shunning by
other members who do not wish to “catch” the pollution (Friedman, 2017, p. 6).
The details of Romani law, historically, have been kept secret from
non-Romanies, just as in the case of Jewish law (Harris, 2001, pp. ix-x). 

In medieval Europe, non-Jewish authorities strengthened the Jewish tradition of
self-governance by grants of legal autonomy, allowing Jewish authorities to
judge all disputes between Jews and other Jews, even to the extent of allowing
them to operate their own prisons and collect taxes for the support of Jewish
governments, effectively forming a “state within a state” (Katz, 1993, pp.
65-87). Socially, Jewish organizations also provided opportunities for
charitable giving, socializing, and even guilds, the medieval precursor to
labor unions (Katz, 1993, pp. 132-40). As for taxes paid to non-Jewish
authorities, the governments of Europe simply levied a single sum on the local
Jewish authorities, who then managed all the details involved with assessing
and collecting these taxes from Jewish individuals themselves (Bartal, 2005, p.
21). 

European authorities did not give Romanies the same level of autonomy in
general, practicing the widespread enslavement or enserfment of Romanies,
discussed in Chapter 4. However, there are some records, from the fifteenth
century (Friedman, 2017, p. 1) and the eighteenth century (Friedman, 2017, p.
10) which describe similar grants of autonomy to some Romani populations.
Nevertheless, the high degree of Romani resistance to outside control through a
variety of tactics discussed in this Chapter as well as Chapter 4 lead to a
degree _de facto_ autonomy, if not _de jure_. These tactics of resistance
include widespread practices of avoiding registration in government documents
and censuses and providing false names when recorded contact is inevitable
(Friedman, 2017, pp. 11-12).

For both groups, self-government has historically played an important role in
giving individuals a strong incentive to pay attention to the norms of their
group. A Jewish or Romani person who is part of a legally autonomous community
does not have to worry as much about the norms of the outside world (except in
cases involving outsiders) but instead has to be concerned with the concerns of
the Ashkenazi or Romani community. Likewise, the often hostile attitude of
outsiders has meant that the most effective path to respect and power for
Ashkenazim and Romani individuals has historically been to rise in status
within the community, rather than within the outside world’s structures. In
this way, judicial autonomy contributes to the survival of both groups as
collectives, and strengthens their collective identities. This parallels
conditions in the modern world: people frequently take up arms for their
governments and pledge allegiance to them, but do not typically engage in
warfare on behalf of their religious organizations or kin groups except in
cultures where those religious or family organizations wield governmental
power. In the medieval period, as far as internal matters were concerned, the
Ashkenazi and to a lesser degree Romani communities were effectively
governments.

#### Outside Responses

How have European cultures and governments responded to the presence of
Ashkenazi and Romani people in Eastern Europe?

An important, arguably the most important, answer to this question is provided
by the judicial autonomy discussed above in the answer to the previous
question. To avoid redundancy, this section will not repeat that analysis, but
will discuss other ways in which European cultures and governments have
responded to Ashkenazi and Romani presence.

In the case of Ashkenazim, the “ghetto” system in place throughout most of
Europe forced Ashkenazim to live in all-Ashkenazi neighborhoods (Katz, 1993, p.
11). As “foreigners” by the standards of Christian Europe, Jews were not
considered to have land ownership rights, but were considered to live in any
area at the pleasure of the local authorities, who could remove them at any
time at will, and sometimes did (Katz, 1993, pp. 13-16). However, the nobility
of Poland-Lithuania found the presence of Jews useful, in effect outsourcing to
them large portions of the management of local non-Jewish peasants and local
agricultural and economic production (Bartal, 2005, p. 18). This lead to a
perception (and reality) of Jewish economic dominance in trade and banking,
which made Jews a profitable source of taxes for the Polish nobility (Bartal,
2005, p. 21; Katz, 1993, p. 45-46). 

Paradoxically, the very powerlessness of Jews ensured that the Polish
authorities found them non-threatening, and made non-Jewish authorities
comfortable in giving them a large degree of management responsibility for
governmental and economic matters (Katz, 1993, p. 46). To borrow a perhaps
strange metaphor, consider eunuchs in the Ottoman Empire. It is a commonplace
of history that kings often employed eunuchs to administer their harems,
because eunuchs clearly posed no threat to the paternity of the king’s future
offspring. Their powerlessness, paradoxically, gave them a unique access to
political influence, in some cases pushing them to heights of power which
non-eunuchs were excluded from (see, for example, Junne, 2016). The eunuch, in
effect, exchanged a common form of familial power in a patriarchal society for
political power, although eunuchs were typically made so against their will or
when too young to consent. Likewise, the ease of expelling Jews made them ideal
managers in the eyes of the Polish nobility, who then felt an ease in giving
them administrative roles made possible by their non-threatening legal status.
While Jews certainly did not ask to be easily expelled, their inferior legal
status did have some indirect benefits. It is left as an exercise to the reader
to consider whether these benefits were worthwhile.

Romanies were likewise liable to repeated expulsions (Hancock, 1991, p. 5),
but, perhaps due to a lack of literacy and more stringent avoidance of contact
with non-Romanies, their expulsion did not yield any economic dividends. Unlike
Jews who maintained religious separation, Romanies tended to officially join
local religions, but then maintain their own beliefs and hold the local
religion at arm’s length (Matras, 2015, p. 118). As discussed above, this lead
to persecution, both in the form of attempts to force greater religious
observance, and in attempts to bar Romanies from churches altogether. 

#### Modern Outcomes

What differences in the history of the two groups have contributed to the very
different situations of Ashkenazim and Romanies in the modern world?

As discussed more fully in Chapters 2 and 4, as well as the present chapter,
with the exception of some stricter Orthodox Haredi groups who experience high
levels of poverty, Ashkenazim have enjoyed a very high level of economic and
academic representation in the modern world. This follows from deep historical
antecedants: Ashkenazim have held a high position in Eastern Europe throughout
their existence there, and have continued to hold high status in their diaspora
communities in the United States and Israel. An extended tradition of literacy
and scholarship in Jewish religious law is a likely contributor to this. It
would be an oversimplification to say that the modern experience has been
uniformly positive, however, as the holocaust primarily targeted Ashkenazim and
resulted in the displacement of most surviving Jews to the United States and
Israel (Tapper, 2016, p. 20). Another modern outcome is the increased rate of
intermarriage with both non-Ashkenazi Jews (Goldberg, 1996, p. 40) and non-Jews
(Clark, 2014, p. 283). This could be interpreted positively or negatively,
depending on the view one takes. In terms of acceptance by non-Jews and
integration in modern society, it is certainly a positive sign that large
numbers are willing to intermarry. In terms of the continued existence of Jews
as a distinct people, it represents a threat, and is contrary to Orthodox
Jewish tradition.

As discussed above, Romanies continue to face “appallingly low social,
economic, and educational status” (Crowe, 2007, p. xxi). This includes
unemployment rates around 80% (Taylor, 2014, p. 22), life expectancies
reminiscent of third-world countries despite living in Europe and the United
States (Hancock, 1999, p. 7; Clark, 2014, p. 240), and an extreme avoidance of
modern medical care (Hancock, 2002, p. 88). Continuing the historical pattern
of expulsions, those segments of European Romani society which persist in
nomadism continue to be evicted from their settlements on a regular basis
(Taylor, 2014, pp. 187-234). High rates of dropping out from school persist,
and entire Romani communities exist in which no adults are literate (Clark,
2014, p. 240; Matras, 2015, p. 13; Taylor, 2014, pp. 215-6). Most Europeans
continue to oppose intermarriage with Romanies (“Religious Belief,” 2017).
Despite, or perhaps because of, their marginal status, Romanies have continued
to carry out their cultural traditions (Matras, 2015, p. 3).

The differences between the modern outcomes of Ashkenazim and Romanies seem to
plausibly correlate to the differences in their experiences in Europe and prior
to their immigration to Europe. While debate continues to rage in the scholarly
world over how much of the Bible is historical (Davis, 2004), the Bible
preserves at least the impression of a social world in which Jews managed to
rise to high positions in non-Jewish societies. For example, there is the
story, generally regarded by scholars as fictional (see Hendel, 2002, p. 64)
but culturally influential, of Joseph rising from slavery to rule Egypt
(Genesis 37-50). Likewise, the books of Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, whether read as
history or as legend, reflect aspirations to succeed and even achieve
governmental influence within a non-Jewish framework while maintaining a Jewish
identity. In the case of Ezra and Nehemiah, this extends as far as aspirations
for self-governance within the framework of non-Jewish rule. This model for
survival runs strikingly parallel to the historical experience of Ashkenazim in
the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. Likewise, the Exodus and Esther reflect
concerns about attempted genocide, which run parallel to obvious modern
concerns.

In contrast, the ancestors of Romanies lived as a marginal caste within the
Hindu system in India, and carried from India purity laws which ensured and
reinforced their position as a marginal caste within Europe. In effect, both
groups have engaged in a project which has recreated, for better or worse,
elements of their earliest cultures extending back far into pre-modern times.
Outside actors, whether motivated by economic gain or religious and ethnic
hostility, have engaged in a variety of responses to Ashkenazi and Romani
presence which have cemented the existence of both as distinct,
non-assimilating cultures. In the case of Romanies, if Matras is correct, this
extends even to occupational style and nomadism.

#### Relationship to the Field

This project has built upon and extended the works of ethnographic and
historical scholars. While some scholars have noted similarities between the
Ashkenazi and Romani communities (especially Barnett, 2013; Carmichael, 2001;
Friedman, forthcoming) these previous works have been limited in their scope.
Barnett focuses mostly on stereotypes as an activist combating them, Carmichael
focuses on the similarities between Jewish and Romani law, and Friedman
discusses the legal systems of both with a very brief mention of some
similarities. Likewise, the broad overview in Chapter 2 found a large number of
works which discuss Ashkenazi and Jewish history. This project has worked
within the framework of information found in the literature review, and
extended that information with more specific data that is in agreement with,
and complements, the initial findings. 

### Discussion of Results

Where previous works have occasionally compared Ashkenazi and Romani history,
this project pushes further, and attempts to connect both the internal cultural
practices of both groups and their place within the broader framework of
medieval Eastern Europe to the history of their Jewish and Indian antecedents
and their status in the modern world. It argues for a picture of internal and
external forces as being intertwined in the production and maintenance of
cultural distinctions, and argues for a view which sees modern outcomes as the
product of extremely tenacious deep historical precedents. The conclusions this
work have come to complement and extend the broad overview provided in Chapter
2. While it is no doubt desirable and useful to come to an understanding of
particular times and places, such as the Romanies of Finland today, or the
status of Ashkenazim in modern Israel, this project suggests that these
specific modern settings are only comprehensible in light of deep and tenacious
historical trends.

### Conclusions

This project set out to compare and contrast the histories of Ashkenazim and
Romanies. The results suggest that both groups, throughout the last millennium,
have historically, and continue, to show signs of a strong connection to
patterns of living established well before their appearance in Europe.
Historically both groups have utilized strong purity codes and other forms of
traditional law and social organization in a largely successful quest for
self-determination, not in the national sense (until the recent establishment
of the state of Israel), but through the creation of a parallel society
insulated from the culture of the broader surrounding world. In creating and
maintaining a separate space for themselves, both groups have faced the often
hostile actions of outside powers, whose responses to their presence, whether
in the more benign sense of granting autonomy or in the more sinister use of
expulsion, exclusion, and discrimination, have had the effect of strengthening
the cultural identities of Romanies and Ashkenazim. While both groups have had
varying degrees of increased openness to the modern era, both also continue
long-standing patterns of difference as they continue to negotiate their place
in the world. While it may be easy to dismiss the medieval period as alien to
our own, this study has demonstrated the continuing relevance of not only
medieval, but even ancient history in continuing to affect the present in
tangible and measurable ways.


# References

* Barnett, R. (2013). _Jews & Gypsies: Myths & reality_. 
* Bartal, I. (2005). _The Jews of Eastern Europe, 1772-1881_. (Naor, C.,
  Trans.). (Original work published 2002). Philadelphia, PA: University of
Pennsylvania Press. 
* Bellinzoni, A. (2009). _Old Testament: An introduction to biblical
  scholarship_. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books. 
* Berman, S. (2016). _Boundaries of loyalty: Testimony against fellow Jews in
  non-Jewish courts_. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
* Carmichael, C. (2001). In W. O. Weyrauch (Ed.), _Gypsy law: Romani legal
  traditions and culture_ (pp. 117-136). Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press. 
* Cederberg, I. (2006).  The International Romani Writers Association. In A.
  Marsh & E. Strand (Eds.), _Gypsies and the problem of identities: Contextual,
constructed, and contested_ (pp. 121-124). Istanbul, Turkey: Swedish Research
Institute in Istanbul.
* Chua, A. & Rubenfeld, J. (2014). _The triple package: How three unlikely
  traits explain the rise and fall of cultural groups in America._ New York,
NY: Penguin Books.
* Clark, G. (2014). _The son also rises: Surnames and the History of Social
  Mobility._ Princeton, UK: Princeton University Press.
* Cochran, G., Hardy, J, & Harpending, H. (2006). _A natural history of
  Ashkenazi intelligence_. Journal of Biosocial Science, 38 (5), pp. 659-693.
doi:10.1017/S0021932005027069
* Collins, C. F. (2015). Pathways to Delinquency and Imprisonment. In C. F.
  Collins, (Ed.), _Black girls and adolescents: Facing the challenges_. Santa
Barbara, CA: Praeger. 
* Costa, M. D., Pereira, J. B., Pala, M., Fernandes, V., Olivieri, A., Achilli,
  A., . . . Richards, M. B. (2013). A substantial prehistoric European ancestry
amongst Ashkenazi maternal lineages. _Nature Communications_, _4_, 1-7.
doi:10.1038/ncomms3543
* Crowe, D. M. (2007). _A history of the Gypsies of Eastern Europe and Russia_.
  (2d ed.). New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 
* Davis, T. W. (2004). _Shifting sands: The rise and fall of biblical
  archaeology_. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
* Dorff, E. N. (2005). The Jewish family in America: Contemporary challenges
  and traditional resources. In M. J. Broyde & M. Ausubel, (Eds.), _Marriage,
sex, and family in Judaism_. Oxford, UK: Rowman & Littlefield.
* EU image may be rebounding, but frustrations remain. (2014, March 12). _Pew
  Research_. Retrieved from
http://www.pewglobal.org/2014/05/12/a-fragile-rebound-for-eu-image-on-eve-of-european-parliament-elections/
* Feldman, L. H. (1993). _Jew and Gentile in the ancient world: Attitudes and
  interactions from Alexander to Justinian_. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press. 
* Fraser, A. (1995). _The Gypsies_ (2nd ed.). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing. 
* Friedman, D. D. (2017). _Legal systems very different from ours_. Manuscript
  in preparation. Manuscript is currently paginated by individual chapters.
References concerning Romani law are given their page number from the chapter
tentatively entitled “Romani Law,” while references concerning Jewish law are
given their page number from the chapter tentatively entitled “Jewish law.” 
* Frost, R. (2015). _The Oxford History of Poland-Lithuania: Volume 1: The
  making of the Polish-Lithuanian Union_, 1385-1569. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
* Gabe, T. (2010). _Poverty in the United States: 2008_. No location given:
  Congressional Research Service.
* Goldberg, H. (1996). Introduction. In H. Goldberg (Ed.), _Sephardi and Middle
  Eastern Jewries: History and culture in the modern era_ (pp. 1-58).
Indianapolis, IN: Indiana University Press. 
* Gruen, E. S. (2002.) _Diaspora: Jews amidst Greeks and Romans_. Cambridge,
  MA: Harvard University Press. 
* Hancock, I. (1991). Introduction. In D. Crowe & J. Kolsti (Eds.), _The
  Gypsies of Eastern Europe_ (pp. 3-9). Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe.
* Hancock, I. (2002). _We are the Romani people: Ame sam e Rromane džene_.
  Hatfield, UK: University of Hertfordshire Press.
* Hendel, R. (2012). Historical Context. In C. A. Evans, J. N. Lohr, & D. L.
  Peterson (Eds.), _The book of Genesis: composition, reception, and
interpretation_. Danvers, MA: Brill.
* Harris, A. P. (2001). Foreward. In W. O. Weyrauch (Ed.), _Gypsy law: Romani
  legal traditions and culture_. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
* Hurst, C. E. & McConnell, D. L. (2010). _An Amish paradox: Diversity & change
  in the world’s largest Amish community_. Baltimore, MA: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
* Junne, G. (2016). _The black eunuchs of the Ottoman Empire_. London, UK:
  Tauris & Co. 
* Katz, J. (1993). _Tradition and crisis: Jewish society at the end of the
  Middle Ages_. (B. D. Cooperman, Trans.). (Original work published 1958)
* Kaufman, M. (1996). _Love, marriage, and family in Jewish law and tradition_.
  Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.
* Kenrick, D. (2004). _Gypsies: From the Ganges to the Thames_. Hertfordshire,
  UK: University of Hertfordshire Press.
* Kraybill, D. B. (1994). Plotting social change across four affiliations. In
  D. B. Kraybill & M. A. Olshan, (Eds.) _The Amish struggle with modernity_.
Hanover, NH: University Press of New England.
* Matras, Y. (2015). _The Romani Gypsies_. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of
  Harvard University Press. 
* Mayall, D. (2004). _Gypsy identities 1500-200: From Egipcyans and moon-men to
  the ethnic Romany_. London, UK: Routledge. 
* Mendelsohn, E. (1999). _People of the city: Jews and the urban challenge_.
  New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
* Neuberger, B. (2009). Israel. In M. Thiel (Ed.), _The ‘militant democracy’
  principle in modern democracies_. New York, NY: Routledge. 
* OECD. (2011). _Higher education in regional and city development and city
  development_. No location given: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development.
* Rai, N., Chaubey, G., Tamang, R., Pathak, A. K., Singh, V. K., Karmin, M.,
  Singh, M., ... Thangaraj, K. (2012, November 28). The phylogeography of
Y-chromosome haplogroup h1a1a-m82 reveals the likely Indian origin of the
European Romani populations. _PLOS ONE_, 7, 1-7.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0048477
* Rattner, A., & Fishman, G. (1998). _Justice for all? Jews and Arabs in the
  Israeli criminal justice system_. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers.
* Religious belief and national belonging in Central and Eastern Europe. (2017,
  May 10). _Pew Research_. Retrieved from
http://www.pewforum.org/2017/05/10/religious-belief-and-national-belonging-in-central-and-eastern-europe/
* Schniedewind, W. M. (2005). _How the Bible became a book: The textualization
  of ancient Israel_. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
* Tapper, A. J. (2016). _Judaisms: A twenty-first-century introduction to Jews
  and Jewish identities_. Oakland, CA: University of California Press. 
* Taylor, B. (2014). _Another darkness, another dawn: A history of Gypsies,
  Roma, and Travellers_. London, UK: Reaktion Books.
* Weyrauch, W. O. (2001). Romaniya: An introduction to Gypsy law. In W. O.
  Weyrauch (Ed.), _Gypsy law: Romani legal traditions and culture_ (pp. 1-10).
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
* Weyrauch, W. O. (Ed.). (2001). _Gypsy law: Romani legal traditions and
  culture._ Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
* Wright, M. J. (2012). _Studying Judaism: The critical issues_. London, UK:
  Continuum International Publishing Group. 

---

_This page is released under the [CC0
1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) license._

