---
title: HTLCS:LP3 -- Chapter 8 exercises
description: Worked out problems from the book
layout: post
date: "2019-10-20"
---

Below are exercises from chapter 8 of _[How to Think Like a Computer Scientist:
Learning with Python 3](index.html)_. The text in italics comes from the
textbook, and the code (except where it is obviously part of the textbook's
prompt) is my solutions.

## 8.19.2 -- Weird names

_Modify:_

{% highlight ruby %}
prefixes = "JKLMNOPQ"
suffix = "ack"

for letter in prefixes:
    print(letter + suffix)
{% endhighlight %}

_so that_ `Ouack` _and_ `Quack` _are spelled correctly._

There are other ways to do this, but one option I like is to add some
whitespace and split a string to give us a list of prefixes:

{% highlight ruby %}
prefixes = "J K L M N Ou P Qu".split()
suffix = "ack"

for prefix in prefixes:
    print(prefix + suffix)
{% endhighlight %}

## 8.19.3 -- Counting instances of a particular letter in a string

_Encapsulate_

{% highlight ruby %}
fruit = "banana"
count = 0
for char in fruit:
    if char == "a":
        count += 1
print(count)
{% endhighlight %}

_in a function named_ `count_letters`, _and generalize it so that it accepts
the string and the letter as arguments. Make the function return the number of
characters, rather than print the answer. The caller should do the printing._

We can do that like so:

{% highlight ruby %}
def count_letters(ltr, string):
    """Count the number of times a letter ltr appears in a string."""
    count = 0
    for char in string:
        if char == ltr:
            count += 1
    return count
{% endhighlight %}

## 8.19.4 -- Using the string method `find` to count occurrences of a letter

_Now rewrite the_ `count_letters` _function so that instead of traversing the
string, it repeatedly calls the find method, with the optional third parameter
to locate new occurrences of the letter being counted._

I was a bit puzzled how an "optional third parameter" would be worked into
this, as the optional third parameter of the `find` method is an endpoint for a
search. After a while I figured that the optional third parameter must be an
optional third parameter that _I_ write, and the only way I could think of to
make _that_ work is to make this one of those functions that calls itself. So
here's what I have, though I'm not sure whether this is exactly what the
textbook authors had in mind:

{% highlight ruby %}
def count_letters2(letter, string, position=0):
    """Count the number of times a letter appears in a string.

    Does not count occurrences before position.
    """
    new_position = string.find(letter, position)
    if new_position != -1:
        return 1 + count_letters2(letter, string, new_position + 1)
    else:
        return 0
{% endhighlight %}

## 8.19.5 -- Counting words that include "e"

_Assign to a variable in your program a triple-quoted string that contains your
favourite paragraph of text — perhaps a poem, a speech, instructions to bake a
cake, some inspirational verses, etc._

_Write a function which removes all punctuation from the string, breaks the
string into a list of words, and counts the number of words in your text that
contain the letter “e”. Your program should print an analysis of the text like
this:_

```
Your text contains 243 words, of which 109 (44.8%) contain an "e".
```

Here's my solution:

{% highlight ruby %}
def e_routine():
    """Display some statistics.

    Takes a preset paragraph and prints statistics about
    how many words in it contain the letter 'e'.
    """
    paragraph = """Call me Ishmael. Some years ago—never mind how long
        precisely—having little or no money in my purse, and nothing
        particular to interest me on shore, I thought I would sail about
        a little and see the watery part of the world. It is a way I
        have of driving off the spleen and regulating the circulation.
        Whenever I find myself growing grim about the mouth; whenever it
        is a damp, drizzly November in my soul; whenever I find myself
        involuntarily pausing before coffin warehouses, and bringing up
        the rear of every funeral I meet; and especially whenever my
        hypos get such an upper hand of me, that it requires a strong
        moral principle to prevent me from deliberately stepping into
        the street, and methodically knocking people’s hats off—then, I
        account it high time to get to sea as soon as I can. This is my
        substitute for pistol and ball. With a philosophical flourish
        Cato throws himself upon his sword; I quietly take to the ship.
        There is nothing surprising in this. If they but knew it, almost
        all men in their degree, some time or other, cherish very nearly
        the same feelings towards the ocean with me. """
    table = str.maketrans("—", " ", string.punctuation)
    paragraph = paragraph.translate(table)
    paragraph = paragraph.split()

    e_words = 0
    for word in paragraph:
        if "e" in word:
            e_words += 1

    total_words = len(paragraph)
    e_percent = e_words * 100 / total_words
    template = 'Your text contains {0} words, ' 
        'of which {1} ({2:.2f}%) contain an "e".'
    print(template.format(total_words, e_words, e_percent))
{% endhighlight %}

My version prints:

```
Your text contains 201 words, of which 78 (38.81%) contain an "e".
```

## 8.19.6 -- A pretty multiplication table

_Print a neat looking multiplication table like this:_

{% highlight ruby %}
        1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9  10  11  12
  :--------------------------------------------------
 1:     1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9  10  11  12
 2:     2   4   6   8  10  12  14  16  18  20  22  24
 3:     3   6   9  12  15  18  21  24  27  30  33  36
 4:     4   8  12  16  20  24  28  32  36  40  44  48
 5:     5  10  15  20  25  30  35  40  45  50  55  60
 6:     6  12  18  24  30  36  42  48  54  60  66  72
 7:     7  14  21  28  35  42  49  56  63  70  77  84
 8:     8  16  24  32  40  48  56  64  72  80  88  96
 9:     9  18  27  36  45  54  63  72  81  90  99 108
10:    10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90 100 110 120
11:    11  22  33  44  55  66  77  88  99 110 121 132
12:    12  24  36  48  60  72  84  96 108 120 132 144
{% endhighlight %}

Here's some code that can do that.

{% highlight ruby %}
def print_multiplication_table(n):
    """Print a multiplication table n by n.

    Formatting gets all screwed if n >= 32. But why would anyone
    want a multiplication table that large?
    """
    # make first line
    line = "    "
    for i in range(1, n + 1):
        line = line + "{:4}".format(i)
    print(line)

    # make dividing line
    line = "   :"
    for i in range(n):
        line = line + "----"
    print(line)

    # make the main body line by line
    for i in range(1, n+1):
        line = "{0:3}:".format(i)
        for j in range(1, n + 1):
            line = line + "{:4}".format(i*j)
        print(line)
{% endhighlight %}

## 8.19.7 -- String reversal

_Write a function that reverses its string argument, and satisfies these tests:_

{% highlight ruby %}
test(reverse("happy") == "yppah")
test(reverse("Python") == "nohtyP")
test(reverse("") == "")
test(reverse("a") == "a")
{% endhighlight %}

We can do this using slice notation:

{% highlight ruby %}
def reverse(string):
    string = string[::-1]
    return string
{% endhighlight %}

## 8.19.8 -- "Mirroring" a string

_Write a function that mirrors its argument:_

{% highlight ruby %}
test(mirror("good") == "gooddoog")
test(mirror("Python") == "PythonnohtyP")
test(mirror("") == "")
test(mirror("a") == "aa")
{% endhighlight%}

I think the textbook intention may have been to have us rely on our previous
`reverse(string)` function:

{% highlight ruby %}
def mirror(string):
    string = string + reverse(string)
    return string
{% endhighlight %}

But if we don't want this function to depend on another function, we can just:

{% highlight ruby %}
def mirror(string):
    """Return a string plus its reverse."""
    return string + string[::-1]
{% endhighlight %}

## 8.19.9 -- Remove occurrences of a letter from a string

_Write a function that removes all occurrences of a given letter from a
string:_

{% highlight ruby %}
test(remove_letter("a", "apple") == "pple")
test(remove_letter("a", "banana") == "bnn")
test(remove_letter("z", "banana") == "banana")
test(remove_letter("i", "Mississippi") == "Msssspp")
test(remove_letter("b", "") = "")
test(remove_letter("b", "c") = "c")
{% endhighlight %}

We can do that like so:

{% highlight ruby %}
def remove_letter(ltr, string):
    """Remove a letter ltr from a string.

    Removes all instances of ltr and returns a new string without it.
    """
    new_string = ""
    for char in string:
        if char != ltr:
            new_string = new_string + char
    return new_string
{% endhighlight %}

## 8.19.10 -- Palindrome detection

_Write a function that recognizes palindromes. (Hint: use your_ `reverse`
_function to make this easy!):_

{% highlight ruby %}
test(is_palindrome("abba"))
test(not is_palindrome("abab"))
test(is_palindrome("tenet"))
test(not is_palindrome("banana"))
test(is_palindrome("straw warts"))
test(is_palindrome("a"))
#test(is_palindrome(""))    # Is an empty string a palindrome?
{% endhighlight %}

This one's pretty simple:

{% highlight ruby %}
def is_palindrome(a_string):
    """Return whether a_string is a palindrome."""
    return a_string == reverse(a_string)
{% endhighlight %}

## 8.19.11 -- Count appearances of a substring

_Write a function that counts how many times a substring occurs in a string:_

{% highlight ruby %}
test(count("is", "Mississippi") == 2)
test(count("an", "banana") == 2)
test(count("ana", "banana") == 2)
test(count("nana", "banana") == 1)
test(count("nanan", "banana") == 0)
test(count("aaa", "aaaaaa") == 4)
{% endhighlight %}

We can do this by running the `find()` method repeatedly: starting at the
beginning of the string. It will return the first index, if there is one, where
the first instance of the substring starts. Then, starting at the next
character after the index, we'll search for another instance, and so on until
we can't find any more. Throughout, we'll use a counter variable which we bump
each time we find an appearance. That can look like this:

{% highlight ruby %}
def count(sub_string, string):
    """Count the numbers of times sub_string appears in string."""
    appearances = 0
    last_found_at = -1
    while True:
        last_found_at = string.find(sub_string, last_found_at + 1)
        if last_found_at == -1:
            return appearances
        else:
            appearances += 1
{% endhighlight %}

## 8.19.12 -- Remove a substring once

Write a function that removes the first occurrence of a string from another
string:

{% highlight ruby %}
test(remove("an", "banana") == "bana")
test(remove("cyc", "bicycle") == "bile")
test(remove("iss", "Mississippi") == "Missippi")
test(remove("eggs", "bicycle") == "bicycle")
{% endhighlight %}

First, we can find the first instance of the string using `find()`, which
returns the index where the substring starts within the string. (If the
substring doesn't occur, we'll just return the original string.) Using the
length of the substring, we can also easily figure out where the substring
ends. Then we can create a new string to output, made up of everything _except_
the bit we want to remove.

{% highlight ruby %}
def remove(substring, string):
    """Remove the first instance of a substring from a string.

    If the substring does not occur in the string, return the whole
    original string.
    """
    start = string.find(substring)
    if start == -1:
        return string
    stop = start + len(substring)
    output_string = string[0:start] + string[stop:]
    return output_string
{% endhighlight %}

At least, that's how I solved it, until I did a little Googling, which turned
up a much more efficient way to do it. There's a string method `replace(old,
new, count)` that we can use within a string to replace a substring `old` with
a substring `new`, and we can optionally specify that we do it `count` number
of times.

Perversely, we can define _removing_ a substring as simply _replacing_ the
substring with an empty string `""`. And because `replace()` starts from the
beginning of the string, setting `count` to 1 will "replace" the first instance
only. And so we can now rewrite our function with just one functional line:

{% highlight ruby %}
def remove(substring, string):
    """Remove first instance of substring from string."""
    return string.replace(substring, "", 1)
{% endhighlight %}

## 8.19.13 -- Remove all occurrences of a substring

_Write a function that removes all occurrences of a string from another
string:_

{% highlight ruby %}
test(remove_all("an", "banana") == "ba")
test(remove_all("cyc", "bicycle") == "bile")
test(remove_all("iss", "Mississippi") == "Mippi")
test(remove_all("eggs", "bicycle") == "bicycle")
{% endhighlight %}

Using `replace()`, we can do this by simply removing `count` from our last
function.

{% highlight ruby %}
def remove_all(substring, string):
    """Remove all instances of substring from string."""
    return string.replace(substring, "")
{% endhighlight %}

Please, note, though, that although this removes all occurrences of a substring
that can be found in the _original_ string, it does not guarantee that the
removed substring will not occur in the output. That is, if you hand this
function `remove_all("na", "bnnaak")`, it will return `"bnak"`. If you want to
guarantee the non-occurrence of the substring, you'd need to write a somewhat
different function that does multiple passes.

For that more stringent requirement, we could do something recursive like:

{% highlight ruby %}
def remove_all_really_thoroughly(substring, string):
    """Remove all instances of substring until none are left."""
    next_pass = remove_all(substring, string)
    if next_pass == string:
        return string
    else:
        return remove_all_really_thoroughly(substring, next_pass)
{% endhighlight %}

That would would, for example, return `"bk"` if you gave it
`remove_all_really_thoroughly("na", "bnnnnnnnnnaaaaaaaaak")`. I suppose that,
with certain really long string, the recursion could theoretically be
inefficient (I think). But you'd have to cook up some really perverse inputs
before that became relevant.

---

_This page is released under the [GNU Free Documentation
License](http://openbookproject.net/thinkcs/python/english3e/fdl-1.3.html), any
version 1.3 or later produced by the Free Software Foundation. I am grateful to
the authors of the original textbook for releasing it that way: Peter
Wentworth, Jeffrey Elkner, Allen B. Downey, and Chris Meyers._


